PROMETHEUS AND PANDORA


Those who are interested in watching the mental development of a child
must have noted that when the baby has learned to speak even a little,
it begins to show its growing intelligence by asking questions. "What
is this?" it would seem at first to ask with regard to simple things
that to it are still mysteries. Soon it arrives at the more
far-reaching inquiries--"Why is this so?" "How did this happen?" And
as the child's mental growth continues, the painstaking and
conscientious parent or guardian is many times faced by questions
which lack of knowledge, or a sensitive honesty, prevents him from
answering either with assurance or with ingenuity.

As with the child, so it has ever been with the human race. Man has
always come into the world asking "How?" "Why?" "What?" and so the
Hebrew, the Greek, the Maori, the Australian blackfellow, the
Norseman--in a word, each race of mankind--has formed for itself an
explanation of existence, an answer to the questions of the groping
child-mind--"Who made the world?" "What is God?" "What made a God
think of fire and air and water?" "Why am I, _I_?"

Into the explanation of creation and existence given by the Greeks
come the stories of Prometheus and of Pandora. The world, as first it
was, to the Greeks was such a world as the one of which we read in the
Book of Genesis--"without form, and void." It was a sunless world in 
which land, air, and sea were mixed up together, and over which
reigned a deity called Chaos. With him ruled the goddess of Night and
their son was Erebus, god of Darkness. When the two beautiful children
of Erebus, Light and Day, had flooded formless space with their
radiance, Eros, the god of Love, was born, and Light and Day and Love,
working together, turned discord into harmony and made the earth, the
sea, and the sky into one perfect whole. A giant race, a race of
Titans, in time populated this newly-made earth, and of these one of
the mightiest was Prometheus. To him, and to his brother Epimethus,
was entrusted by Eros the distribution of the gifts of faculties and
of instincts to all the living creatures in the world, and the task of
making a creature lower than the gods, something less great than the
Titans, yet in knowledge and in understanding infinitely higher than
the beasts and birds and fishes. At the hands of the Titan brothers,
birds, beasts, and fishes had fared handsomely. They were Titanic in
their generosity, and so prodigal had they been in their gifts that
when they would fain have carried out the commands of Eros they found
that nothing was left for the equipment of this being, to be called
Man. Yet, nothing daunted, Prometheus took some clay from the ground
at his feet, moistened it with water, and fashioned it into an image,
in form like the gods. Into its nostrils Eros breathed the spirit of
life, Pallas Athené endowed it with a soul, and the first man looked
wonderingly round on the earth that was to be his heritage.
Prometheus, proud of the beautiful thing of his own creation, would
fain have given Man a worthy gift, but no gift remained for him. He
was naked, unprotected, more helpless than any of the beasts of the
field, more to be pitied than any of them in that he had a soul to
suffer.

Surely Zeus, the All Powerful, ruler of Olympus, would have compassion
on Man? But Prometheus looked to Zeus in vain; compassion he had none.
Then, in infinite pity, Prometheus bethought himself of a power
belonging to the gods alone and unshared by any living creature on the
earth.

"We shall give Fire to the Man whom we have made," he said to
Epimethus. To Epimethus this seemed an impossibility, but to
Prometheus nothing was impossible. He bided his time and, unseen by
the gods, he made his way into Olympus, lighted a hollow torch with a
spark from the chariot of the Sun and hastened back to earth with this
royal gift to Man. Assuredly no other gift could have brought him more
completely the empire that has since been his. No longer did he
tremble and cower in the darkness of caves when Zeus hurled his
lightnings across the sky. No more did he dread the animals that
hunted him and drove him in terror before them.

Armed with fire, the beasts became his vassals. With fire he forged
weapons, defied the frost and cold, coined money, made implements for
tillage, introduced the arts, and was able to destroy as well as to
create.

From his throne on Olympus, Zeus looked down on the earth and saw,
with wonder, airy columns of blue-grey smoke that curled upwards to
the sky. He watched more closely, and realised with terrible wrath
that the moving flowers of red and gold that he saw in that land that
the Titans shared with men, came from fire, that had hitherto been the
gods' own sacred power. Speedily he assembled a council of the gods to
mete out to Prometheus a punishment fit for the blasphemous daring of
his crime. This council decided at length to create a thing that
should for evermore charm the souls and hearts of men, and yet, for
evermore, be man's undoing.

To Vulcan, god of fire, whose province Prometheus had insulted, was
given the work of fashioning out of clay and water the creature by
which the honour of the gods was to be avenged. "The lame Vulcan,"
says Hesiod, poet of Greek mythology, "formed out of the earth an
image resembling a chaste virgin. Pallas Athené, of the blue eyes,
hastened to ornament her and to robe her in a white tunic. She dressed
on the crown of her head a long veil, skilfully fashioned and
admirable to see; she crowned her forehead with graceful garlands of
newly-opened flowers and a golden diadem that the lame Vulcan, the
illustrious god, had made with his own hands to please the puissant
Jove. On this crown Vulcan had chiselled the innumerable animals that
the continents and the sea nourish in their bosoms, all endowed with a
marvellous grace and apparently alive. When he had finally completed,
instead of some useful work, this illustrious masterpiece, he brought
into the assembly this virgin, proud of the ornaments with which she
had been decked by the blue-eyed goddess, daughter of a powerful
sire." To this beautiful creature, destined by the gods to be man's
destroyer, each of them gave a gift. From Aphrodite she got beauty,
from Apollo music, from Hermes the gift of a winning tongue. And when
all that great company in Olympus had bestowed their gifts, they named
the woman Pandora--"Gifted by all the Gods." Thus equipped for
victory, Pandora was led by Hermes to the world that was thenceforward
to be her home. As a gift from the gods she was presented to
Prometheus.

But Prometheus, gazing in wonder at the violet blue eyes bestowed by
Aphrodite, that looked wonderingly back into his own as if they were
indeed as innocent as two violets wet with the morning dew, hardened
his great heart, and would have none of her. As a hero--a worthy
descendant of Titans--said in later years, "Timeo Danaos et dona
ferentes,"--"I fear the Greeks, even when they bring gifts." And
Prometheus, the greatly-daring, knowing that he merited the anger of
the gods, saw treachery in a gift outwardly so perfect. Not only would
he not accept this exquisite creature for his own, but he hastened to
caution his brother also to refuse her.

But well were they named Prometheus (Forethought) and Epimethus
(Afterthought). For Epimethus it was enough to look at this peerless
woman, sent from the gods, for him to love her and to believe in her
utterly. She was the fairest thing on earth, worthy indeed of the
deathless gods who had created her. Perfect, too, was the happiness
that she brought with her to Epimethus. Before her coming, as he well
knew now, the fair world had been incomplete. Since she came the
fragrant flowers had grown more sweet for him, the song of the birds
more full of melody. He found new life in Pandora and marvelled how
his brother could ever have fancied that she could bring to the world
aught but peace and joyousness.

Now when the gods had entrusted to the Titan brothers the endowment of
all living things upon the earth, they had been careful to withhold
everything that might bring into the world pain, sickness, anxiety,
bitterness of heart, remorse, or soul-crushing sorrow. All these
hurtful things were imprisoned in a coffer which was given into the
care of the trusty Epimethus.

To Pandora the world into which she came was all fresh, all new, quite
full of unexpected joys and delightful surprises. It was a world of
mystery, but mystery of which her great, adoring, simple Titan held
the golden key. When she saw the coffer which never was opened, what
then more natural than that she should ask Epimethus what it
contained? But the contents were known only to the gods. Epimethus was
unable to answer. Day by day, the curiosity of Pandora increased. To
her the gods had never given anything but good. Surely there must be
here gifts more precious still. What if the Olympians had destined her
to be the one to open the casket, and had sent her to earth in order
that she might bestow on this dear world, on the men who lived on it,
and on her own magnificent Titan, happiness and blessings which only
the minds of gods could have conceived? Thus did there come a day when
Pandora, unconscious instrument in the hands of a vengeful Olympian,
in all faith, and with the courage that is born of faith and of love,
opened the lid of the prison-house of evil. And as from coffers in the
old Egyptian tombs, the live plague can still rush forth and slay, the
long-imprisoned evils rushed forth upon the fair earth and on the
human beings who lived on it--malignant, ruthless, fierce,
treacherous, and cruel--poisoning, slaying, devouring. Plague and
pestilence and murder, envy and malice and revenge and all
viciousness--an ugly wolf-pack indeed was that one let loose by
Pandora. Terror, doubt, misery, had all rushed straightway to attack
her heart, while the evils of which she had never dreamed stung mind
and soul into dismay and horror, when, by hastily shutting the lid of
the coffer, she tried to undo the evil she had done.

And lo, she found that the gods had imprisoned one good gift only in
this Inferno of horrors and of ugliness. In the world there had never
been any need of Hope. What work was there for Hope to do where all
was perfect, and where each creature possessed the desire of body and
of heart? Therefore Hope was thrust into the chest that held the
evils, a star in a black night, a lily growing on a dung-heap. And as
Pandora, white-lipped and trembling, looked into the otherwise empty
box, courage came back to her heart, and Epimethus let fall to his
side the arm that would have slain the woman of his love because there
came to him, like a draught of wine to a warrior spent in battle, an
imperial vision of the sons of men through all the aeons to come,
combatting all evils of body and of soul, going on conquering and to
conquer. Thus, saved by Hope, the Titan and the woman faced the
future, and for them the vengeance of the gods was stayed.

                          "Yet I argue not
    Against Heav'n's hand or will, nor bate a jot
    Of heart or hope; but still bear up and steer
    Right onward."

So spoke Milton, the blind Titan of the seventeenth century; and
Shakespeare says:

    "True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings;
    Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings."

Upon the earth, and on the children of men who were as gods in their
knowledge and mastery of the force of fire, Jupiter had had his
revenge. For Prometheus he reserved another punishment. He, the
greatly-daring, once the dear friend and companion of Zeus himself,
was chained to a rock on Mount Caucasus by the vindictive deity.
There, on a dizzy height, his body thrust against the sun-baked rock,
Prometheus had to endure the torment of having a foul-beaked vulture
tear out his liver, as though he were a piece of carrion lying on the
mountain side. All day, while the sun mercilessly smote him and the
blue sky turned from red to black before his pain-racked eyes, the
torture went on. Each night, when the filthy bird of prey that worked
the will of the gods spread its dark wings and flew back to its eyrie,
the Titan endured the cruel mercy of having his body grow whole once
more. But with daybreak there came again the silent shadow, the smell
of the unclean thing, and again with fierce beak and talons the
vulture greedily began its work.

Thirty thousand years was the time of his sentence, and yet Prometheus
knew that at any moment he could have brought his torment to an end. A
secret was his--a mighty secret, the revelation of which would have
brought him the mercy of Zeus and have reinstated him in the favour of
the all-powerful god. Yet did he prefer to endure his agonies rather
than to free himself by bowing to the desires of a tyrant who had
caused Man to be made, yet denied to Man those gifts that made him
nobler than the beasts and raised him almost to the heights of the
Olympians. Thus for him the weary centuries dragged by--in suffering
that knew no respite--in endurance that the gods might have ended.
Prometheus had brought an imperial gift to the men that he had made,
and imperially he paid the penalty.

    "Three thousand years of sleep-unsheltered hours,
    And moments aye divided by keen pangs
    Till they seemed years, torture and solitude,
    Scorn and despair,--these are mine empire.
    More glorious far than that which thou surveyest
    From thine unenvied throne, O, Mighty God!
    Almighty, had I deigned to share the shame
    Of thine ill tyranny, and hung not here
    Nailed to this wall of eagle-baffling mountain,
    Black, wintry, dead, unmeasured; without herb,
    Insect, or beast, or shape or sound of life.
    Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever!"

        Shelley.

    "Titan! to whose immortal eyes
    The sufferings of mortality
    Seen in their sad reality,
    Were not as things that gods despise;
    What was thy pity's recompense?
    A silent suffering, and intense;
    The rock, the vulture, and the chain,
    All that the proud can feel of pain,
    The agony they do not show,
    The suffocating sense of woe,
    Which speaks but in its loneliness,
    And then is jealous lest the sky
    Should have a listener, nor will sigh
    Until its voice is echoless."

        Byron.

    "Yet, I am still Prometheus, wiser grown
    By years of solitude,--that holds apart
    The past and future, giving the soul room
    To search into itself,--and long commune
    With this eternal silence;--more a god,
    In my long-suffering and strength to meet
    With equal front the direst shafts of fate,
    Than thou in thy faint-hearted despotism ...
    Therefore, great heart, bear up! thou art but type
    Of what all lofty spirits endure that fain
    Would win men back to strength and peace through love:
    Each hath his lonely peak, and on each heart
    Envy, or scorn or hatred tears lifelong
    With vulture beak; yet the high soul is left;
    And faith, which is but hope grown wise, and love
    And patience, which at last shall overcome."

        Lowell.




PYGMALION


In days when the world was young and when the gods walked on the
earth, there reigned over the island of Cyprus a sculptor-king, and
king of sculptors, named Pygmalion. In the language of our own day, we
should call him "wedded to his art." In woman he only saw the bane of
man. Women, he believed, lured men from the paths to which their
destiny called them. While man walked alone, he walked free--he had
given no "hostages to fortune." Alone, man could live for his art,
could combat every danger that beset him, could escape, unhampered,
from every pitfall in life. But woman was the ivy that clings to the
oak, and throttles the oak in the end. No woman, vowed Pygmalion,
should ever hamper him. And so at length he came to hate women, and,
free of heart and mind, his genius wrought such great things that he
became a very perfect sculptor. He had one passion, a passion for his
art, and that sufficed him. Out of great rough blocks of marble he
would hew the most perfect semblance of men and of women, and of
everything that seemed to him most beautiful and the most worth
preserving.

When we look now at the Venus of Milo, at the Diana of Versailles, and
at the Apollo Belvidere in the Vatican, we can imagine what were the
greater things that the sculptor of Cyprus freed from the dead blocks
of marble. One day as he chipped and chiselled there came to him,
like the rough sketch of a great picture, the semblance of a woman.
How it came he knew not. Only he knew that in that great mass of pure
white stone there seemed to be imprisoned the exquisite image of a
woman, a woman that he must set free. Slowly, gradually, the woman
came. Soon he knew that she was the most beautiful thing that his art
had ever wrought. All that he had ever thought that a woman _should_
be, this woman was. Her form and features were all most perfect, and
so perfect were they, that he felt very sure that, had she been a
woman indeed, most perfect would have been the soul within. For her he
worked as he had never worked before. There came, at last, a day when
he felt that another touch would be insult to the exquisite thing he
had created. He laid his chisel aside and sat down to gaze at the
Perfect Woman. She seemed to gaze back at him. Her parted lips were
ready to speak--to smile. Her hands were held out to hold his hands.
Then Pygmalion covered his eyes. He, the hater of women, loved a
woman--a woman of chilly marble. The women he had scorned were
avenged.

[Illustration: THEN PYGMALION COVERED HIS EYES]

Day by day his passion for the woman of his own creation grew and
grew. His hands no longer wielded the chisel. They grew idle. He would
stand under the great pines and gaze across the sapphire-blue sea, and
dream strange dreams of a marble woman who walked across the waves
with arms outstretched, with smiling lips, and who became a woman of
warm flesh and blood when her bare feet touched the yellow sand, and
the bright sun of Cyprus touched her marble hair and turned it into
hair of living gold. Then he would hasten back to his studio to find
the miracle still unaccomplished, and would passionately kiss the
little cold hands, and lay beside the little cold feet the presents he
knew that young girls loved--bright shells and exquisite precious
stones, gorgeous-hued birds and fragrant flowers, shining amber, and
beads that sparkled and flashed with all the most lovely combinations
of colour that the mind of artist could devise. Yet more he did, for
he spent vast sums on priceless pearls and hung them in her ears and
upon her cold white breast; and the merchants wondered who could be
the one upon whom Pygmalion lavished the money from his treasury.

To his divinity he gave a name--"Galatea"; and always on still nights
the myriad silver stars would seem to breathe to him "Galatea" ... and
on those days when the tempests blew across the sandy wastes of Arabia
and churned up the fierce white surf on the rocks of Cyprus, the very
spirit of the storm seemed to moan through the crash of waves in
longing, hopeless and unutterable--"Galatea!... Galatea!..." For her
he decked a couch with Tyrian purple, and on the softest of pillows he
laid the beautiful head of the marble woman that he loved.

So the time wore on until the festival of Aphrodite drew near. Smoke
from many altars curled out to sea, the odour of incense mingled with
the fragrance of the great pine trees, and garlanded victims lowed and
bleated as they were led to the sacrifice. As the leader of his
people, Pygmalion faithfully and perfectly performed all his part in
the solemnities and at last he was left beside the altar to pray
alone. Never before had his words faltered as he laid his petitions
before the gods, but on this day he spoke not as a sculptor-king, but
as a child who was half afraid of what he asked.

"O Aphrodite!" he said, "who can do all things, give me, I pray you,
one like my Galatea for my wife!"

"Give me my Galatea," he dared not say; but Aphrodite knew well the
words he would fain have uttered, and smiled to think how Pygmalion at
last was on his knees. In token that his prayer was answered, three
times she made the flames on the altar shoot up in a fiery point, and
Pygmalion went home, scarcely daring to hope, not allowing his
gladness to conquer his fear.

The shadows of evening were falling as he went into the room that he
had made sacred to Galatea. On the purple-covered couch she lay, and
as he entered it seemed as though she met his eyes with her own;
almost it seemed that she smiled at him in welcome. He quickly went up
to her and, kneeling by her side, he pressed his lips on those lips of
chilly marble. So many times he had done it before, and always it was
as though the icy lips that could never live sent their chill right
through his heart, but now it surely seemed to him that the lips were
cold no longer. He felt one of the little hands, and no more did it
remain heavy and cold and stiff in his touch, but lay in his own hand,
soft and living and warm. He softly laid his fingers on the marble
hair, and lo, it was the soft and wavy burnished golden hair of his
desire. Again, reverently as he had laid his offerings that day on
the altar of Venus, Pygmalion kissed her lips. And then did Galatea,
with warm and rosy cheeks, widely open her eyes, like pools in a dark
mountain stream on which the sun is shining, and gaze with timid
gladness into his own.

There are no after tales of Pygmalion and Galatea. We only know that
their lives were happy and that to them was born a son, Paphos, from
whom the city sacred to Aphrodite received its name. Perhaps Aphrodite
may have smiled sometimes to watch Pygmalion, once the scorner of
women, the adoring servant of the woman that his own hands had first
designed.




PHAETON

    "The road, to drive on which unskilled were Phaeton's hands."

        Dante--_Purgatorio_.


To Apollo, the sun-god, and Clymene, a beautiful ocean-nymph, there
was born in the pleasant land of Greece a child to whom was given the
name of Phaeton, the Bright and Shining One. The rays of the sun
seemed to live in the curls of the fearless little lad, and when at
noon other children would seek the cool shade of the cypress groves,
Phaeton would hold his head aloft and gaze fearlessly up at the brazen
sky from whence fierce heat beat down upon his golden head.

"Behold, my father drives his chariot across the heavens!" he proudly
proclaimed. "In a little while I, also, will drive the four snow-white
steeds."

His elders heard the childish boast with a smile, but when Epaphos,
half-brother to Apollo, had listened to it many times and beheld the
child, Phaeton, grow into an arrogant lad who held himself as though
he were indeed one of the Immortals, anger grew in his heart. One day
he turned upon Phaeton and spoke in fierce scorn:

"Dost say thou art son of a god? A shameless boaster and a liar art
thou! Hast ever spoken to thy divine sire? Give us some proof of thy
sonship! No more child of the glorious Apollo art thou than are the
vermin his children, that the sun breeds in the dust at my feet."

For a moment, before the cruel taunt, the lad was stricken into
silence, and then, his pride aflame, his young voice shaking with rage
and with bitter shame, he cried aloud: "Thou, Epaphos, art the liar. I
have but to ask my father, and thou shalt see me drive his golden
chariot across the sky."

To his mother he hastened, to get balm for his hurt pride, as many a
time he had got it for the little bodily wounds of childhood, and with
bursting heart he poured forth his story.

"True it is," he said, "that my father has never deigned to speak to
me. Yet I know, because thou hast told me so, that he is my sire. And
now my word is pledged. Apollo must let me drive his steeds, else I am
for evermore branded braggart and liar, and shamed amongst men."

Clymene listened with grief to his complaint. He was so young, so
gallant, so foolish.

"Truly thou art the son of Apollo," she said, "and oh, son of my
heart, thy beauty is his, and thy pride the pride of a son of the
gods. Yet only partly a god art thou, and though thy proud courage
would dare all things, it were mad folly to think of doing what a god
alone can do."

But at last she said to him, "Naught that I can say is of any avail.
Go, seek thy father, and ask him what thou wilt." Then she told him
how he might find the place in the east where Apollo rested ere the
labours of the day began, and with eager gladness Phaeton set out upon
his journey. A long way he travelled, with never a stop, yet when the
glittering dome and jewelled turrets and minarets of the Palace of the
Sun came into view, he forgot his weariness and hastened up the steep
ascent to the home of his father.

Phœbus Apollo, clad in purple that glowed like the radiance of a
cloud in the sunset sky, sat upon his golden throne. The Day, the
Month, and the Year stood by him, and beside them were the Hours.
Spring was there, her head wreathed with flowers; Summer, crowned with
ripened grain; Autumn, with his feet empurpled by the juice of the
grapes; and Winter, with hair all white and stiff with hoar-frost. And
when Phaeton walked up the golden steps that led to his father's
throne, it seemed as though incarnate Youth had come to join the court
of the god of the Sun, and that Youth was so beautiful a thing that it
must surely live forever. Proudly did Apollo know him for his son, and
when the boy looked in his eyes with the arrogant fearlessness of
boyhood, the god greeted him kindly and asked him to tell him why he
came, and what was his petition.

As to Clymene, so also to Apollo, Phaeton told his tale, and his
father listened, half in pride and amusement, half in puzzled
vexation. When the boy stopped, and then breathlessly, with shining
eyes and flushed cheeks, ended up his story with: "And, O light of the
boundless world, if I am indeed thy son, let it be as I have said, and
for one day only let me drive thy chariot across the heavens!" Apollo
shook his head and answered very gravely:

"In truth thou art my dear son," he said, "and by the dreadful Styx,
the river of the dead, I swear that I will give thee any gift that
thou dost name and that will give proof that thy father is the
immortal Apollo. But never to thee nor to any other, be he mortal or
immortal, shall I grant the boon of driving my chariot."

But the boy pled on:

"I am shamed for ever, my father," he said. "Surely thou wouldst not
have son of thine proved liar and braggart?"

"Not even the gods themselves can do this thing," answered Apollo.
"Nay, not even the almighty Zeus. None but I, Phœbus Apollo, may
drive the flaming chariot of the sun, for the way is beset with
dangers and none know it but I."

"Only tell me the way, my father!" cried Phaeton. "So soon I could
learn."

Half in sadness, Apollo smiled.

"The first part of the way is uphill," he said. "So steep it is that
only very slowly can my horses climb it. High in the heavens is the
middle, so high that even I grow dizzy when I look down upon the earth
and the sea. And the last piece of the way is a precipice that rushes
so steeply downward that my hands can scarce check the mad rush of my
galloping horses. And all the while, the heaven is spinning round, and
the stars with it. By the horns of the Bull I have to drive, past the
Archer whose bow is taut and ready to slay, close to where the
Scorpion stretches out its arms and the great Crab's claws grope for a
prey...."

"I fear none of these things, oh my father!" cried Phaeton. "Grant
that for one day only I drive thy white-maned steeds!"

Very pitifully Apollo looked at him, and for a little space he was
silent.

"The little human hands," he said at length, "the little human
frame!--and with them the soul of a god. The pity of it, my son. Dost
not know that the boon that thou dost crave from me is Death?"

"Rather Death than Dishonour," said Phaeton, and proudly he added,
"For once would I drive like the god, my father. I have no fear."

So was Apollo vanquished, and Phaeton gained his heart's desire.

From the courtyard of the Palace the four white horses were led, and
they pawed the air and neighed aloud in the glory of their strength.
They drew the chariot whose axle and pole and wheels were of gold,
with spokes of silver, while inside were rows of diamonds and of
chrysolites that gave dazzling reflection of the sun. Then Apollo
anointed the face of Phaeton with a powerful essence that might keep
him from being smitten by the flames, and upon his head he placed the
rays of the sun. And then the stars went away, even to the Daystar
that went last of all, and, at Apollo's signal, Aurora, the
rosy-fingered, threw open the purple gates of the east, and Phaeton
saw a path of pale rose-colour open before him.

With a cry of exultation, the boy leapt into the chariot and laid hold
of the golden reins. Barely did he hear Apollo's parting words: "Hold
fast the reins, and spare the whip. All thy strength will be wanted to
hold the horses in. Go not too high nor too low. The middle course is
safest and best. Follow, if thou canst, in the old tracks of my
chariot wheels!" His glad voice of thanks for the godlike boon rang
back to where Apollo stood and watched him vanishing into the dawn
that still was soft in hue as the feathers on the breast of a dove.

Uphill at first the white steeds made their way, and the fire from
their nostrils tinged with flame-colour the dark clouds that hung over
the land and the sea. With rapture, Phaeton felt that truly he was the
son of a god, and that at length he was enjoying his heritage. The day
for which, through all his short life, he had longed, had come at
last. He was driving the chariot whose progress even now was awaking
the sleeping earth. The radiance from its wheels and from the rays he
wore round his head was painting the clouds, and he laughed aloud in
rapture as he saw, far down below, the sea and the rivers he had
bathed in as a human boy, mirroring the green and rose and purple, and
gold and silver, and fierce crimson, that he, Phaeton, was placing in
the sky. The grey mist rolled from the mountain tops at his desire.
The white fog rolled up from the valleys. All living things awoke; the
flowers opened their petals; the grain grew golden; the fruit grew
ripe. Could but Epaphos see him now! Surely he must see him, and
realise that not Apollo but Phaeton was guiding the horses of his
father, driving the chariot of the Sun.

Quicker and yet more quick grew the pace of the white-maned steeds.
Soon they left the morning breezes behind, and very soon they knew
that these were not the hands of the god, their master, that held the
golden reins. Like an air-ship without its accustomed ballast, the
chariot rolled unsteadily, and not only the boy's light weight but his
light hold on their bridles made them grow mad with a lust for speed.
The white foam flew from their mouths like the spume from the giant
waves of a furious sea, and their pace was swift as that of a bolt
that is cast by the arm of Zeus.

Yet Phaeton had no fear, and when they heard him shout in rapture,
"Quicker still, brave ones! more swiftly still!" it made them speed
onwards, madly, blindly, with the headlong rush of a storm. There was
no hope for them to keep on the beaten track, and soon Phaeton had his
rapture checked by the terrible realisation that they had strayed far
out of the course and that his hands were not strong enough to guide
them. Close to the Great Bear and the Little Bear they passed, and
these were scorched with heat. The Serpent which, torpid, chilly and
harmless, lies coiled round the North Pole, felt a warmth that made it
grow fierce and harmful again. Downward, ever downward galloped the
maddened horses, and soon Phaeton saw the sea as a shield of molten
brass, and the earth so near that all things on it were visible. When
they passed the Scorpion and only just missed destruction from its
menacing fangs, fear entered into the boy's heart. His mother had
spoken truth. He was only partly a god, and he was very, very young.
In impotent horror he tugged at the reins to try to check the horses'
descent, then, forgetful of Apollo's warning, he smote them angrily.
But anger met anger, and the fury of the immortal steeds had scorn
for the wrath of a mortal boy. With a great toss of their mighty heads
they had torn the guiding reins from his grasp, and as he stood,
giddily swaying from side to side, Phaeton knew that the boon he had
craved from his father must in truth be death for him.

And, lo, it was a hideous death, for with eyes that were like flames
that burned his brain, the boy beheld the terrible havoc that his
pride had wrought. That blazing chariot of the Sun made the clouds
smoke, and dried up all the rivers and water-springs. Fire burst from
the mountain tops, great cities were destroyed. The beauty of the
earth was ravished, woods and meadows and all green and pleasant
places were laid waste. The harvests perished, the flocks and they who
had herded them lay dead. Over Libya the horses took him, and the
desert of Libya remains a barren wilderness to this day, while those
sturdy Ethiopians who survived are black even now as a consequence of
that cruel heat. The Nile changed its course in order to escape, and
nymphs and nereids in terror sought for the sanctuary of some watery
place that had escaped destruction. The face of the burned and
blackened earth, where the bodies of thousands of human beings lay
charred to ashes, cracked and sent dismay to Pluto by the lurid light
that penetrated even to his throne.

All this Phaeton saw, saw in impotent agony of soul. His boyish folly
and pride had been great, but the excruciating anguish that made him
shed tears of blood, was indeed a punishment even too heavy for an
erring god.

From the havoc around her, the Earth at last looked up, and with
blackened face and blinded eyes, and in a voice that was harsh and
very, very weary, she called to Zeus to look down from Olympus and
behold the ruin that had been wrought by the chariot of the Sun. And
Zeus, the cloud-gatherer, looked down and beheld. And at the sight of
that piteous devastation his brow grew dark, and terrible was his
wrath against him who had held the reins of the chariot. Calling upon
Apollo and all the other gods to witness him, he seized a lightning
bolt, and for a moment the deathless Zeus and all the dwellers in
Olympus looked on the fiery chariot in which stood the swaying,
slight, lithe figure of a young lad, blinded with horror, shaken with
agony. Then, from his hand, Zeus cast the bolt, and the chariot was
dashed into fragments, and Phaeton, his golden hair ablaze, fell, like
a bright shooting star, from the heavens above, into the river
Eridanus. The steeds returned to their master, Apollo, and in rage and
grief Apollo lashed them. Angrily, too, and very rebelliously did he
speak of the punishment meted to his son by the ruler of the
Immortals. Yet in truth the punishment was a merciful one. Phaeton was
only half a god, and no human life were fit to live after the day of
dire anguish that had been his.

Bitter was the mourning of Clymene over her beautiful only son, and so
ceaselessly did his three sisters, the Heliades, weep for their
brother, that the gods turned them into poplar trees that grew by the
bank of the river, and, when still they wept, their tears turned into
precious amber as they fell. Yet another mourned for Phaeton--Phaeton
"dead ere his prime." Cycnus, King of Liguria, had dearly loved the
gallant boy, and again and yet again he dived deep in the river and
brought forth the charred fragments of what had once been the
beautiful son of a god, and gave to them honourable burial. Yet he
could not rest satisfied that he had won all that remained of his
friend from the river's bed, and so he continued to haunt the stream,
ever diving, ever searching, until the gods grew weary of his restless
sorrow and changed him into a swan.

And still we see the swan sailing mournfully along, like a
white-sailed barque that is bearing the body of a king to its rest,
and ever and anon plunging deep into the water as though the search
for the boy who would fain have been a god were never to come to an
end.

To Phaeton the Italian Naiades reared a tomb, and inscribed on the
stone these words:

    "Driver of Phœbus' chariot, Phaëton,
    Struck by Jove's thunder, rests beneath this stone,
    He could not rule his father's car of fire,
    Yet was it much, so nobly to aspire."

        Ovid.




ENDYMION


To the modern popular mind perhaps none of the goddesses of
Greece--not even Venus herself--has more appeal than has the huntress
goddess, Diana. Those who know but little of ancient statuary can
still brighten to intelligent recognition of the huntress with her
quiver and her little stag when they meet with them in picture gallery
or in suburban garden. That unlettered sportsman in weather-worn pink,
slowly riding over the fragrant dead leaves by the muddy roadside on
this chill, grey morning, may never have heard of Artemis, but he is
quite ready to make intelligent reference to Diana to the handsome
young sportswoman whom he finds by the covert side; and Sir Walter's
Diana Vernon has helped the little-read public to realise that the
original Diana was a goddess worthy of being sponsor to one of the
finest heroines of fiction.

But not to the sportsman alone, but also to the youth or maid who
loves the moon--they know not why--to those whom the shadows of the
trees on a woodland path at night mean a grip of the heart, while
"pale Dian" scuds over the dark clouds that are soaring far beyond the
tree-tops and is peeping, chaste and pale, through the branches of the
firs and giant pines, there is something arresting, enthralling, in
the thought of the goddess Diana who now has for hunting-ground the
blue firmament of heaven where the pale Pleiades

    "Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid."

        Tennyson.

    "She gleans her silvan trophies; down the wold
    She hears the sobbing of the stags that flee
    Mixed with the music of the hunting roll'd,
    But her delight is all in archery,
    And naught of ruth and pity wotteth she
    More than her hounds that follow on the flight;
    The goddess draws a golden bow of might
    And thick she rains the gentle shafts that slay.
    She tosses loose her locks upon the night,
    And through the dim wood Dian threads her way."

        Andrew Lang.

Again and again in mythological history we come on stories of the
goddess, sometimes under her best known name of Diana, sometimes under
her older Greek name of Artemis, and now and again as Selene, the
moon-goddess, the Luna of the Romans. Her twin brother was Apollo, god
of the sun, and with him she shared the power of unerringly wielding a
bow and of sending grave plagues and pestilences, while both were
patrons of music and of poetry.

When the sun-god's golden chariot had driven down into the west, then
would his sister's noiseless-footed silver steeds be driven across the
sky, while the huntress shot from her bow at will silent arrows that
would slay without warning a joyous young mother with her newly-born
babe, or would wantonly pierce, with a lifelong pain, the heart of
some luckless mortal.

Now one night as she passed Mount Latmos, there chanced to be a
shepherd lad lying asleep beside his sleeping flock. Many times had
Endymion watched the goddess from afar, half afraid of one so
beautiful and yet so ruthless, but never before had Diana realised the
youth's wonderful beauty. She checked her hounds when they would have
swept on in their chase through the night, and stood beside Endymion.
She judged him to be as perfect as her own brother, Apollo--yet more
perfect, perhaps, for on his upturned sleeping face was the silver
glamour of her own dear moon. Fierce and burning passion could come
with the sun's burning rays, but love that came in the moon's pale
light was passion mixed with gramarye. She gazed for long, and when,
in his sleep, Endymion smiled, she knelt beside him and, stooping,
gently kissed his lips. The touch of a moonbeam on a sleeping rose was
no more gentle than was Diana's touch, yet it was sufficient to wake
Endymion. And as, while one's body sleeps on, one's half-waking mind,
now and again in a lifetime seems to realise an ecstasy of happiness
so perfect that one dares not wake lest, by waking, the wings of one's
realised ideal should slip between grasping fingers and so escape
forever, so did Endymion realise the kiss of the goddess. But before
his sleepy eyes could be his senses' witnesses, Diana had hastened
away. Endymion, springing to his feet, saw only his sleeping flock,
nor did his dogs awake when he heard what seemed to him to be the
baying of hounds in full cry in a forest far up the mountain. Only to
his own heart did he dare to whisper what was this wonderful thing
that he believed had befallen him, and although he laid himself
down, hoping that once again this miracle might be granted to him, no
miracle came; nor could he sleep, so great was his longing.

[Illustration: SHE CHECKED HER HOUNDS, AND STOOD BESIDE ENDYMION]

All the next day, through the sultry hours while Apollo drove his
chariot of burnished gold through the land, Endymion, as he watched
his flocks, tried to dream his dream once more, and longed for the day
to end and the cool, dark night to return. When night came he tried to
lie awake and see what might befall, but when kind sleep had closed
his tired eyes,

    "There came a lovely vision of a maid,
    Who seemed to step as from a golden car
    Out of the low-hung moon."

        Lewis Morris.

Always she kissed him, yet when her kiss awoke him he never could see
anything more tangible than a shaft of silver moonlight on the moving
bushes of the mountain side, never hear anything more real than the
far-away echo of the baying of pursuing hounds, and if, with eager,
greatly-daring eyes, he looked skywards, a dark cloud, so it seemed to
him, would always hasten to hide the moon from his longing gaze.

In this manner time passed on. The days of Endymion were filled by
longing day-dreams. His sleeping hours ever brought him ecstasy. Ever,
too, to the goddess, the human being that she loved seemed to her to
grow more precious. For her all the joy of day and of night was
concentrated in the moments she spent by the side of the sleeping
Endymion. The flocks of the shepherd flourished like those of no other
herd. No wild beast dared come near them; no storm nor disease
assailed them. Yet for Endymion the things of earth no longer held any
value. He lived only for his dear dream's sake. Had he been permitted
to grow old and worn and tired, and still a dreamer, who knows how his
story might have ended? But to Diana there came the fear that with age
his beauty might wane, and from her father, Zeus, she obtained for the
one she loved the gifts of unending youth and of eternal sleep.

There came a night when the dreams of Endymion had no end. That was a
night when the moon made for herself broad silver paths across the
sea, from far horizon to the shore where the little waves lapped and
curled in a radiant, ever-moving silver fringe. Silver also were the
leaves of the forest trees, and between the branches of the solemn
cypresses and of the stately dark pines, Diana shot her silver arrows.
No baying of hounds came then to make Endymion's flocks move uneasily
in their sleep, but the silver stars seemed to sing in unison
together. While still those gentle lips touched his, hands as gentle
lifted up the sleeping Endymion and bore him to a secret cave in Mount
Latmos. And there, for evermore, she came to kiss the mouth of her
sleeping lover. There, forever, slept Endymion, happy in the perfect
bliss of dreams that have no ugly awaking, of an ideal love that knows
no ending.




ORPHEUS

    "Orpheus with his lute made trees,
    And the mountain tops that freeze,
    Bow themselves when he did sing;
    To his music plants and flowers
    Ever sprung, as sun and showers
    There had made a lasting spring.
    Everything that heard him play,
    Even the billows of the sea,
    Hung their heads, and then lay by,
    In sweet music is such art,
    Killing care and grief of heart
    Fall asleep, or hearing die."

        Shakespeare.

    "Are we not all lovers as Orpheus was, loving what is
    gone from us forever, and seeking it vainly in the
    solitudes and wilderness of the mind, and crying to
    Eurydice to come again? And are we not all foolish as
    Orpheus was, hoping by the agony of love and the ecstasy
    of will to win back Eurydice; and do we not all fail, as
    Orpheus failed, because we forsake the way of the other
    world for the way of this world?"

        Fiona Macleod.


It is the custom nowadays for scientists and for other scholarly
people to take hold of the old myths, to take them to pieces, and to
find some deep, hidden meaning in each part of the story. So you will
find that some will tell you that Orpheus is the personification of
the winds which "tear up trees as they course along, chanting their
wild music," and that Eurydice is the morning "with its short-lived
beauty." Others say that Orpheus is "the mythological expression of
the delight which music gives to the primitive races," while yet
others accept without hesitation the idea that Orpheus is the sun
that, when day is done, plunges into the black abyss of night, in the
vain hope of overtaking his lost bride, Eurydice, the rosy dawn. And,
whether they be right or wrong, it would seem that the sadness that
comes to us sometimes as the day dies and the last of the sun's rays
vanish to leave the hills and valleys dark and cold, the sorrowful
feeling that we cannot understand when, in country places, we hear
music coming from far away, or listen to the plaintive song of the
bird, are things that very specially belong to the story of Orpheus.

In the country of Thrace, surrounded by all the best gifts of the
gods, Orpheus was born. His father was Apollo, the god of music and of
song, his mother the muse Calliope. Apollo gave his little son a lyre,
and himself taught him how to play it. It was not long before all the
wild things in the woods of Thrace crept out from the green trees and
thick undergrowth, and from the holes and caves in the rocks, to
listen to the music that the child's fingers made. The coo of the dove
to his mate, the flute-clear trill of the blackbird, the song of the
lark, the liquid carol of the nightingale--all ceased when the boy
made music. The winds that whispered their secrets to the trees owned
him for their lord, and the proudest trees of the forest bowed their
heads that they might not miss one exquisite sigh that his fingers
drew from the magical strings. Nor man nor beast lived in his day that
he could not sway by the power of his melody. He played a lullaby, and
all things slept. He played a love-lilt, and the flowers sprang up in
full bloom from the cold earth, and the dreaming red rosebud opened
wide her velvet petals, and all the land seemed full of the loving
echoes of the lilt he played. He played a war-march, and, afar off,
the sleeping tyrants of the forest sprang up, wide awake, and bared
their angry teeth, and the untried youths of Thrace ran to beg their
fathers to let them taste battle, while the scarred warriors felt on
their thumbs the sharpness of their sword blades, and smiled, well
content. While he played it would seem as though the very stones and
rocks gained hearts. Nay, the whole heart of the universe became one
great, palpitating, beautiful thing, an instrument from whose
trembling strings was drawn out the music of Orpheus.

He rose to great power, and became a mighty prince of Thrace. Not his
lute alone, but he himself played on the heart of the fair Eurydice
and held it captive. It seemed as though, when they became man and
wife, all happiness must be theirs. But although Hymen, the god of
marriage, himself came to bless them on the day they wed, the omens on
that day were against them. The torch that Hymen carried had no golden
flame, but sent out pungent black smoke that made their eyes water.
They feared they knew not what; but when, soon afterwards, as Eurydice
wandered with the nymphs, her companions, through the blue-shadowed
woods of Thrace, the reason was discovered. A bold shepherd, who did
not know her for a princess, saw Eurydice, and no sooner saw her than
he loved her. He ran after her to proclaim to her his love, and she,
afraid of his wild uncouthness, fled before him. She ran, in her
terror, too swiftly to watch whither she went, and a poisonous snake
that lurked amongst the fern bit the fair white foot that flitted,
like a butterfly, across it. In agonised suffering Eurydice died. Her
spirit went to the land of the Shades, and Orpheus was left
broken-hearted.

The sad winds that blow at night across the sea, the sobbing gales
that tell of wreck and death, the birds that wail in the darkness for
their mates, the sad, soft whisper of the aspen leaves and the leaves
of the heavy clad blue-black cypresses, all now were hushed, for
greater than all, more full of bitter sorrow than any, arose the music
of Orpheus, a long-drawn sob from a broken heart in the Valley of the
Shadow of Death.

Grief came alike to gods and to men as they listened, but no comfort
came to him from the expression of his sorrow. At length, when to bear
his grief longer was impossible for him, Orpheus wandered to Olympus,
and there besought Zeus to give him permission to seek his wife in the
gloomy land of the Shades. Zeus, moved by his anguish, granted the
permission he sought, but solemnly warned him of the terrible perils
of his undertaking.

But the love of Orpheus was too perfect to know any fear; thankfully
he hastened to the dark cave on the side of the promontory of
Taenarus, and soon arrived at the entrance of Hades. Stark and grim
was the three-headed watchdog, Cerberus, which guarded the door, and
with the growls and the furious roaring of a wild beast athirst for
its prey it greeted Orpheus. But Orpheus touched his lute, and the
brute, amazed, sank into silence. And still he played, and the dog
would gently have licked the player's feet, and looked up in his face
with its savage eyes full of the light that we see in the eyes of the
dogs of this earth as they gaze with love at their masters. On, then,
strode Orpheus, playing still, and the melody he drew from his lute
passed before him into the realms of Pluto.

Surely never were heard such strains. They told of perfect, tender
love, of unending longing, of pain too great to end with death. Of all
the beauties of the earth they sang--of the sorrow of the world--of
all the world's desire--of things past--of things to come. And ever,
through the song that the lute sang, there came, like a thread of
silver that is woven in a black velvet pall, a limpid melody. It was
as though a bird sang in the mirk night, and it spoke of peace and of
hope, and of joy that knows no ending.

Into the blackest depths of Hades the sounds sped on their way, and
the hands of Time stood still. From his bitter task of trying to quaff
the stream that ever receded from the parched and burning lips,
Tantalus ceased for a moment. The ceaseless course of Ixion's wheel
was stayed, the vulture's relentless beak no longer tore at the
Titan's liver; Sisyphus gave up his weary task of rolling the stone
and sat on the rock to listen, the Danaïdes rested from their labour
of drawing water in a sieve. For the first time, the cheeks of the
Furies were wet with tears, and the restless shades that came and went
in the darkness, like dead autumn leaves driven by a winter gale,
stood still to gaze and listen. Before the throne where Pluto and his
queen Proserpine were seated, sable-clad and stern, the relentless
Fates at their feet, Orpheus still played on. And to Proserpine then
came the living remembrance of all the joys of her girlhood by the
blue Ægean Sea in the fair island of Sicily. Again she knew the
fragrance and the beauty of the flowers of spring. Even into Hades the
scent of the violets seemed to come, and fresh in her heart was the
sorrow that had been hers on the day on which the ruthless King of
Darkness tore her from her mother and from all that she held most
dear. Silent she sat beside her frowning, stern-faced lord, but her
eyes grew dim.

When, with a quivering sigh, the music stopped, Orpheus fearlessly
pled his cause. To let him have Eurydice, to give him back his more
than life, to grant that he might lead her with him up to "the light
of Heaven"--that was his prayer.

The eyes of Pluto and Proserpine did not dare to meet, yet with one
accord was their answer given. Eurydice should be given back to him,
but only on one condition. Not until he had reached the light of earth
again was he to turn round and look upon the face for a sight of which
his eyes were tired with longing. Eagerly Orpheus complied, and with a
heart almost breaking with gladness he heard the call for Eurydice and
turned to retrace his way, with the light footfall of the little feet
that he adored making music behind him. Too good a thing it
seemed--too unbelievable a joy. She was there--quite close to him.
Their days of happiness were not ended. His love had won her back,
even from the land of darkness. All that he had not told her of that
love while yet she was on earth he would tell her now. All that he had
failed in before, he would make perfect now. The little limping
foot--how it made his soul overflow with adoring tenderness. So near
she was, he might even touch her were he to stretch back his hand....

And then there came to him a hideous doubt. What if Pluto had played
him false? What if there followed him not Eurydice, but a mocking
shade? As he climbed the steep ascent that led upwards to the light,
his fear grew more cruelly real. Almost he could imagine that her
footsteps had stopped, that when he reached the light he would find
himself left once more to his cruel loneliness. Too overwhelming for
him was the doubt. So nearly there they were that the darkness was no
longer that of night, but as that of evening when the long shadows
fall upon the land, and there seemed no reason for Orpheus to wait.

Swiftly he turned, and found his wife behind him, but only for a
moment she stayed. Her arms were thrown open and Orpheus would fain
have grasped her in his own, but before they could touch each other
Eurydice was borne from him, back into the darkness.

"Farewell!" she said--"Farewell!" and her voice was a sigh of hopeless
grief. In mad desperation Orpheus sought to follow her, but his
attempt was vain. At the brink of the dark, fierce-flooded Acheron the
boat with its boatman, old Charon, lay ready to ferry across to the
further shore those whose future lay in the land of Shades. To him ran
Orpheus, in clamorous anxiety to undo the evil he had wrought. But
Charon angrily repulsed him. There was no place for such as Orpheus in
his ferry-boat. Those only who went, never to return, could find a
passage there. For seven long days and seven longer nights Orpheus
waited beside the river, hoping that Charon would relent, but at last
hope died, and he sought the depths of the forests of Thrace, where
trees and rocks and beasts and birds were all his friends.

He took his lyre again then and played:

    "Such strains as would have won the ear
    Of Pluto, to have quite set free
    His half-regained Eurydice."

        Milton.

Day and night he stayed in the shadow of the woodlands, all the sorrow
of his heart expressing itself in the song of his lute. The fiercest
beasts of the forest crawled to his feet and looked up at him with
eyes full of pity. The song of the birds ceased, and when the wind
moaned through the trees they echoed his cry, "Eurydice! Eurydice!"

In the dawning hours it would seem to him that he saw her again,
flitting, a thing of mist and rising sun, across the dimness of the
woods. And when evening came and all things rested, and the night
called out the mystery of the forest, again he would see her. In the
long blue shadows of the trees she would stand--up the woodland paths
she walked, where her little feet fluttered the dry leaves as she
passed. Her face was white as a lily in the moonlight, and ever she
held out her arms to Orpheus:

    "At that elm-vista's end I trace,
    Dimly thy sad leave-taking face,
    Eurydice! Eurydice!
    The tremulous leaves repeat to me
    Eurydice! Eurydice!"

        Lowell.

[Illustration: SWIFTLY HE TURNED, AND FOUND HIS WIFE BEHIND HIM]

For Orpheus it was a good day when Jason, chief of the Argonauts,
sought him out to bid him come with the other heroes and aid in the
quest of the Golden Fleece.

"Have I not had enough of toil and of weary wandering far and wide,"
sighed Orpheus. "In vain is the skill of the voice which my goddess
mother gave me; in vain have I sung and laboured; in vain I went down
to the dead, and charmed all the kings of Hades, to win back Eurydice,
my bride. For I won her, my beloved, and lost her again the same day,
and wandered away in my madness even to Egypt and the Libyan sands,
and the isles of all the seas.... While I charmed in vain the hearts
of men, and the savage forest beasts, and the trees, and the lifeless
stones, with my magic harp and song, giving rest, but finding
none."[3]

But in the good ship _Argo_, Orpheus took his place with the others
and sailed the watery ways, and the songs that Orpheus sang to his
shipmates and that tell of all their great adventures are called the
Songs of Orpheus, or the Orphics, to this day.

Many were the mishaps and disasters that his music warded off. With it
he lulled monsters to sleep; more powerful to work magic on the hearts
of men were his melodies than were the songs of the sirens when they
tried to capture the Argonauts by their wiles, and in their downward,
destroying rush his music checked mountains.

When the quest of the Argonauts was ended, Orpheus returned to his own
land of Thrace. As a hero he had fought and endured hardship, but his
wounded soul remained unhealed. Again the trees listened to the songs
of longing. Again they echoed, "Eurydice! Eurydice!"

As he sat one day near a river in the stillness of the forest, there
came from afar an ugly clamour of sound. It struck against the music
of Orpheus' lute and slew it, as the coarse cries of the screaming
gulls that fight for carrion slay the song of a soaring lark. It was
the day of the feast of Bacchus, and through the woods poured Bacchus
and his Bacchantes, a shameless rout, satyrs capering around them,
centaurs neighing aloud. Long had the Bacchantes hated the loyal
poet-lover of one fair woman whose dwelling was with the Shades. His
ears were ever deaf to their passionate voices, his eyes blind to
their passionate loveliness as they danced through the green trees, a
riot of colour, of fierce beauty, of laughter and of mad song. Mad
they were indeed this day, and in their madness the very existence of
Orpheus was a thing not to be borne. At first they stoned him, but his
music made the stones fall harmless at his feet. Then in a frenzy of
cruelty, with the maniac lust to cause blood to flow, to know the joy
of taking life, they threw themselves upon Orpheus and did him to
death. From limb to limb they tore him, casting at last his head and
his blood-stained lyre into the river. And still, as the water bore
them on, the lyre murmured its last music and the white lips of
Orpheus still breathed of her whom at last he had gone to join in the
shadowy land, "Eurydice! Eurydice!"

"Combien d'autres sont morts de même! C'est la lutte éternelle de la
force brutale contre l'intelligence douce et sublime inspirée du ciel,
dont le royaume n'est pas de ce monde."

In the heavens, as a bright constellation called Lyra, or Orpheus, the
gods placed his lute, and to the place of his martyrdom came the
Muses, and with loving care carried the fragments of the massacred
body to Libetlera, at the foot of Mount Olympus, and there buried
them. And there, unto this day, more sweetly than at any other spot in
any other land, the nightingale sings. For it sings of a love that
knows no ending, of life after death, of a love so strong that it can
conquer even Death, the all-powerful.


FOOTNOTE:

[3] Kingsley.




APOLLO AND DAPHNE


Conqueror of all conquerable earth, yet not always victorious over the
heart of a maid was the golden-locked Apollo.

As mischievous Eros played one day with his bow and arrows, Apollo
beheld him and spoke to him mockingly.

"What hast thou to do with the weapons of war, saucy lad?" he said.
"Leave them for hands such as mine, that know full well how to wield
them. Content thyself with thy torch, and kindle flames, if indeed
thou canst, but such bolts as thy white young arms can drive will
surely not bring scathe to god nor to man."

Then did the son of Aphrodite answer, and as he made answer he laughed
aloud in his glee. "With thine arrows thou mayst strike all things
else, great Apollo, a shaft of mine shall surely strike thy heart!"

Carefully, then, did Eros choose two arrows from his quiver. One,
sharp-pointed and of gold, he fitted carefully to his bow, drew back
the string until it was taut, and then let fly the arrow, that did not
miss its mark, but flew straight to the heart of the sun-god. With the
other arrow, blunt, and tipped with lead, he smote the beautiful
Daphne, daughter of Peneus, the river-god. And then, full joyously did
the boy-god laugh, for his roguish heart knew well that to him who
was struck by the golden shaft must come the last pangs that have
proved many a man's and many a god's undoing, while that leaden-tipped
arrow meant to whomsoever it struck, a hatred of Love and an immunity
from all the heart weakness that Love can bring. Those were the days
when Apollo was young. Never before had he loved.

But as the first fierce storm that assails it bends the young, supple
tree with its green budding leaves before its furious blast, so did
the first love of Apollo bend low his adoring heart. All day as he
held the golden reins of his chariot, until evening when its fiery
wheels were cooled in the waters of the western seas, he thought of
Daphne. All night he dreamed of her. But never did there come to
Daphne a time when she loved Love for Love's sake. Never did she look
with gentle eye on the golden-haired god whose face was as the face of
all the exquisite things that the sunlight shows, remembered in a
dream. Her only passion was a passion for the chase. One of Diana's
nymphs was she, cold and pure and white in soul as the virgin goddess
herself.

There came a day when Apollo could no longer put curbing hands on his
fierce longing. The flames from his chariot still lingered in
reflected glories on sea and hill and sky. The very leaves of the
budding trees of spring were outlined in gold. And through the dim
wood walked Daphne, erect and lithe and living as a sapling in the
early spring.

With beseeching hands, Apollo followed her. A god was he, yet to him
had come the vast humility of passionate intercession for the gift of
love to a little nymph. She heard his steps behind her and turned
round, proud and angry that one should follow her when she had not
willed it.

"Stay!" he said, "daughter of Peneus. No foe am I, but thine own
humble lover. To thee alone do I bow my head. To all others on earth
am I conqueror and king."

But Daphne, hating his words of passionate love, sped on. And when his
passion lent wings to his feet and she heard him gaining on her as she
fled, not as a lover did Daphne look on deathless Apollo, but as a
hateful foe. More swiftly than she had ever run beside her mistress
Diana, leaving the flying winds behind her as she sped, ran Daphne
now. But ever did Apollo gain upon her, and almost had he grasped her
when she reached the green banks of the river of which her father,
Peneus, was god.

"Help me, Peneus!" she cried. "Save me, oh my father, from him whose
love I fear!"

As she spoke the arms of Apollo seized her, yet, even as his arms met
around her waist, lissome and slight as a young willow, Daphne the
nymph was Daphne the nymph no longer. Her fragrant hair, her soft
white arms, her tender body all changed as the sun-god touched them.
Her feet took root in the soft, damp earth by the river. Her arms
sprouted into woody branches and green leaves. Her face vanished, and
the bark of a big tree enclosed her snow-white body. Yet Apollo did
not take away his embrace from her who had been his dear first love.
He knew that her cry to Peneus her father had been answered, yet he
said, "Since thou canst not be my bride, at least thou shalt be my
tree; my hair, my lyre, my quiver shall have thee always, oh laurel
tree of the Immortals!"

So do we still speak of laurels won, and worn by those of deathless
fame, and still does the first love of Apollo crown the heads of those
whose gifts have fitted them to dwell with the dwellers on Olympus.

                "I espouse thee for my tree:
    Be thou the prize of honour and renown;
    The deathless poet, and the poem, crown;
    Thou shalt the Roman festivals adorn,
    And, after poets, be by victors worn."

        Ovid (_Dryden's translation_).




PSYCHE


Those who read for the first time the story of Psyche must at once be
struck by its kinship to the fairy tales of childhood. Here we have
the three sisters, the two elder jealous and spiteful, the youngest
beautiful and gentle and quite unable to defend herself against her
sisters' wicked arts. Here, too, is the mysterious bridegroom who is
never seen and who is lost to his bride because of her lack of faith.
Truly it is an old, old tale--older than all fairy tales--the story of
love that is not strong enough to believe and to wait, and so to "win
through" in the end--the story of seeds of suspicion sown by one full
of malice in an innocent heart, and which bring to the hapless reaper
a cruel harvest.

Once upon a time, so goes the tale, a king and queen had three
beautiful daughters. The first and the second were fair indeed, but
the beauty of the youngest was such that all the people of the land
worshipped it as a thing sent straight from Olympus. They awaited her
outside the royal palace, and when she came, they threw chaplets of
roses and violets for her little feet to tread upon, and sang hymns of
praise as though she were no mortal maiden but a daughter of the
deathless gods.

There were many who said that the beauty of Aphrodite herself was less
perfect than the beauty of Psyche, and when the goddess found that men
were forsaking her altars in order to worship a mortal maiden, great
was her wrath against them and against the princess who, all
unwittingly, had wrought her this shameful harm.

In her garden, sitting amongst the flowers and idly watching his
mother's fair white doves as they preened their snowy feathers in the
sun, Aphrodite found her son Eros, and angrily poured forth to him the
story of her shame.

"Thine must be the task of avenging thy mother's honour," she said.
"Thou who hast the power of making the loves of men, stab with one of
thine arrows the heart of this presumptuous maiden, and shame her
before all other mortals by making her love a monster from which all
others shrink and which all despise." With wicked glee Eros heard his
mother's commands. His beautiful face, still the face of a mischievous
boy, lit up with merriment. This was, in truth, a game after his own
heart. In the garden of Aphrodite is a fountain of sweet, another of
bitter water, and Eros filled two amber vases, one from each fountain,
hung them from his quiver, and

    "Straight he rose from earth and down the wind
    Went glittering 'twixt the blue sky and the sea."

In her chamber Psyche lay fast asleep, and swiftly, almost without a
glance at her, Eros sprinkled some of the bitter drops upon her lips,
and then, with one of his sharpest arrows, pricked her snowy breast.
Like a child who half awakes in fear, and looks up with puzzled,
wondering eyes, Psyche, with a little moan, opened eyes that were
bluer than the violets in spring and gazed at Eros. He knew that he
was invisible, and yet her gaze made him tremble.

"They spoke truth!" said the lad to himself. "Not even my mother is as
fair as this princess."

For a moment her eyelids quivered, and then dropped. Her long dark
lashes fell on her cheeks that were pink as the hearts of the fragile
shells that the waves toss up on western beaches, her red mouth,
curved like the bow of Eros, smiled happily, and Psyche slept again.
With heart that beat as it had never beaten before, Eros gazed upon
her perfect loveliness. With gentle, pitying finger he wiped away the
red drop where his arrow had wounded her, and then stooped and touched
her lips with his own, so lightly that Psyche in her dreams thought
that they had been brushed by a butterfly's wings. Yet in her sleep
she moved, and Eros, starting back, pricked himself with one of his
arrows. And with that prick, for Eros there passed away all the
careless ease of the heart of a boy, and he knew that he loved Psyche
with the unquenchable love of a deathless god. Now, with bitter
regret, all his desire was to undo the wrong he had done to the one
that he loved. Speedily he sprinkled her with the sweet water that
brings joy, and when Psyche rose from her couch she was radiant with
the beauty that comes from a new, undreamed-of happiness.

    "From place to place Love followed her that day
    And ever fairer to his eyes she grew,
    So that at last when from her bower he flew,
    And underneath his feet the moonlit sea
    Went shepherding his waves disorderly,
    He swore that of all gods and men, no one
    Should hold her in his arms but he alone;
    That she should dwell with him in glorious wise
    Like to a goddess in some paradise;
    Yea, he would get from Father Jove this grace
    That she should never die, but her sweet face
    And wonderful fair body should endure
    Till the foundations of the mountains sure
    Were molten in the sea; so utterly
    Did he forget his mother's cruelty."

        William Morris.

Meantime it came to be known all over that land, and in other lands to
which the fame of the fair Psyche had spread, that the mighty goddess
Aphrodite had declared herself the enemy of the princess. Therefore
none dared seek her in marriage, and although many a noble youth
sighed away his heart for love of her, she remained in her father's
palace like an exquisite rose whose thorns make those who fain would
have it for their own, fear to pluck it from the parent stem. Her
sisters married, and her father marvelled why so strange a thing
should come about and why the most beautiful by far of his three
daughters should remain unwed.

At length, laden with royal gifts, an embassy was sent by the king to
the oracle of Apollo to inquire what might be the will of the dwellers
on Olympus concerning his fairest daughter. In a horror of anxiety the
king and his queen and Psyche awaited the return of the ambassadors.
And when they returned, before ever a word was spoken, they knew that
the oracle had spoken Psyche's doom.

"No mortal lover shall fair Psyche know," said the oracle. "For
bridegroom she shall have a monster that neither man nor god can
resist. On the mountain top he awaits her coming. Woe unutterable
shall come to the king and to all the dwellers in his land if he dares
to resist the unalterable dictum of the deathless gods!"

    "... Of dead corpses shalt thou be the king,
    And stumbling through the dark land shalt thou go,
    Howling for second death to end thy woe."

        William Morris.

Only for a little while did the wretched king strive to resist the
decrees of fate. And in her own chamber, where so short a time before the
little princess had known the joy of something inexpressible--something
most exquisite--intangible--unknown--she sat, like a flower broken by the
ruthless storm, sobbing pitifully, dry-eyed, with sobs that strained her
soul, for the shameful, hideous fate that the gods had dealt her.

All night, until her worn-out body could no longer feel, her worn-out
mind think, and kind sleep came to bring her oblivion, Psyche faced
the horror for the sake of her father and of his people, that she knew
she could not avoid. When morning came, her handmaids, white-faced and
red-eyed, came to deck her in all the bridal magnificence that
befitted the most beautiful daughter of a king, and when she was
dressed right royally, and as became a bride, there started up the
mountain a procession at sight of which the gods themselves must have
wept. With bowed heads the king and queen walked before the litter
upon which lay their daughter in her marriage veil of saffron colour,
with rose wreath on her golden hair. White, white were the faces of
the maidens who bore the torches, and yet rose red were they by the
side of Psyche. Minstrels played wedding hymns as they marched
onwards, and it seemed as though the souls of unhappy shades sobbed
through the reeds and moaned through the strings as they played.

At length they reached the rocky place where they knew they must leave
the victim bride, and her father dared not meet her eyes as he turned
his head to go. Yet Psyche watched the procession wending its way
downhill. No more tears had she to shed, and it seemed to her that
what she saw was not a wedding throng, but an assembly of
broken-hearted people who went back to their homes with heavy feet
after burying one that they loved. She saw no sign of the monster who
was to be her bridegroom, yet at every little sound her heart grew
sick with horror, and when the night wind swept through the craggy
peaks and its moans were echoed in loneliness, she fell on her face in
deadly fear and lay on the cold rock in a swoon.

Yet, had Psyche known it, the wind was her friend. For Eros had used
Zephyrus as his trusty messenger and sent him to the mountain top to
find the bride of him "whom neither man nor god could resist."
Tenderly--very tenderly--he was told, must he lift her in his arms,
and bear her to the golden palace in that green and pleasant land
where Eros had his home. So, with all the gentleness of a loving nurse
to a tired little child Zephyrus lifted Psyche, and sped with her in
his strong arms to the flowery meadows behind which towered the golden
palace of Eros, like the sun behind a sky of green and amber and blue
and rose. Deeply, in the weariness of her grief, Psyche slept, and
when she awoke it was to start up with the chill hands of the
realisation of terrible actualities on her heart. But when her eyes
looked round to find the barren rocks, the utter forsakenness, the
coming of an unnameable horror, before her she saw only fair groves
with trees bedecked with fruit and blossom, fragrant meadows, flowers
whose beauty made her eyes grow glad. And from the trees sang birds
with song more sweet than any that Psyche had ever known, and with
brilliant plumage which they preened caressingly when they had dipped
their wings in crystal-sparkling fountains. There, too, stood a noble
palace, golden fronted, and with arcades of stainless marble that
shone like snow in the sun. At first all seemed like part of a dream
from which she dreaded to awake, but soon there came to her the joy of
knowing that all the exquisite things that made appeal to her senses
were indeed realities. Almost holding her breath, she walked forward
to the open golden doors. "It is a trap," she thought. "By this means
does the monster subtly mean to lure me into his golden cage." Yet,
even as she thought, there seemed to be hovering round her winged
words, like little golden birds with souls. And in her ears they
whispered, "Fear not. Doubt not. Recall the half-formed dreams that so
short a time ago brought to thy heart such unutterable joy. No evil
shall come to thee--only the bliss of loving and of being loved."

[Illustration: THUS DID PSYCHE LOSE HER FEAR, AND ENTER THE GOLDEN
DOORS]

Thus did Psyche lose her fear, and enter the golden doors. And
inside the palace she found that all the beautiful things of which she
had ever dreamed, all the perfect things for which she had ever
longed, were there to greet her. From one to another she flitted, like
a humming-bird that sucks honey from one and then from another
gorgeous flower. And then, when she was tired with so much wearing out
of her thankful mind, she found a banquet ready spread for her, with
all the dainties that her dainty soul liked best; and, as she ate,
music so perfect rejoiced her ears that all her soul was soothed and
joyous and at peace. When she had refreshed herself, a soft couch
stood before her, ready for her there to repose, and when that strange
day had come to an end, Psyche knew that, monster or not, she was
beloved by one who had thought for her every thought, and who desired
only her desire.

Night came at last, and when all was dark and still, and Psyche, wide
awake, was full of forebodings and fears lest her happy dreams might
only be misleading fancies, and Horror incarnate might come to crown
her peaceful day, Eros softly entered the palace that was his own.
Even as he had gone to the palace of her father he went now, and found
Psyche lying with violet eyes that stared into the velvety darkness,
seeking something that she hoped for, trembling before something that
brought her dread.

His voice was as the voice of spring when it breathes on the sleeping
earth; he knew each note in Love's music, every word in the great
thing that is Love's vocabulary. Love loved, and Psyche listened, and
soon she knew that her lover was Love himself.

Thus, for Psyche, did a time of perfect happiness begin. All through
the day she roamed in her Love's dominion, and saw on every side the
signs of his passion and of his tenderness. All through the night he
stayed by her, and satisfied all the longing of her heart. Yet always,
ere daybreak, Eros left her, and when she begged him to stay he only
made answer:

    "I am with thee only while I keep
    My visage hidden; and if thou once shouldst see
    My face, I must forsake thee; the high gods
    Link Love with Faith, and he withdraws himself
    From the full gaze of knowledge."

        Lewis Morris.

So did time glide past for Psyche, and ever she grew more in love with
Love; always did her happiness become more complete. Yet, ever and
again, there returned to her the remembrance of those sorrowful days
when her father and mother had broken their hearts over her martyrdom,
and her sisters had looked askance at her as at one whose punishment
must assuredly have come from her own misdoing. Thus at length she
asked Eros to grant her, for love's sake, a boon--to permit her to
have her sisters come to see for themselves the happiness that was
hers. Most unwillingly was her request granted, for the heart of Eros
told him that from their visit no good could come. Yet he was unable
to deny anything to Psyche, and on the following day Zephyrus was sent
to bring the two sisters to the pleasant valley where Psyche had her
home. Eagerly, as she awaited them, Psyche thought she might make the
princely palace wherein she dwelt yet fairer than it was. And almost
ere she could think, her thoughts became realities. When the two
sisters came, they were bewildered with the beauty and the
magnificence of it all. Beside this, their own possessions were paltry
trifles indeed. Quickly, in their little hearts, black envy grew. They
had always been jealous of their younger sister, and now that they
found her, whom all the world believed to have been slain by a
horrible monster, more beautiful than ever, decked with rare jewels,
radiant in her happiness, and queen of a palace fit for the gods,
their envy soon turned to hatred, and they sought how best to wreak
their malice upon the joyous creature who loaded them with priceless
gifts. They began to ply Psyche with questions. He who was her lord,
to whom she owed all her happiness, where was he? Why did he stay away
when her sisters came to be presented to him? What manner of man was
he? Was he fair or dark? Young or old? And as they questioned her,
Psyche grew like a bewildered child and answered in frightened words
that contradicted one another. And well the wicked sisters, who
brooded evil in their hearts, knew that this husband whom Psyche had
never seen must indeed be one of the deathless gods. Wily words they
spoke to her then.

"Alas! unhappy one," they said, "dost think to escape the evil fate
the gods meted out for thee? Thy husband is none other than the
monster of which the oracle spake! Oh, foolish Psyche! canst not
understand that the monster fears the light? Too great horror would
it mean for thee to see the loathsome thing that comes in the
blackness of night and speaks to thee words of love."

White-lipped and trembling, Psyche listened. Drop by drop the
poisonous words passed into her soul. She had thought him king of all
living things--worthy to rule over gods as well as men. She was so
sure that his body was worthy sheath for the heart she knew so
well.... She had pictured him beautiful as Eros, son of
Aphrodite--young and fair, with crisp, golden locks--a husband to
glory in--a lover to adore. And now she knew, with shame and dread,
that he who had won her love between the twilight and the dawn was a
thing to shame her, a monster to be shunned of men.

"What, then, shall I do?" piteously she asked of her sisters. And the
women, pitilessly, and well content, answered:

"Provide thyself with a lamp and a knife sharp enough to slay the man
or monster. And when this creature to whom, to thy undying shame, thou
belongest, sleeps sound, slip from thy couch and in the rays of the
lamp have courage to look upon him in all his horror. Then, when thou
hast seen for thyself that what we say is truth, with thy knife
swiftly slay him. Thus shalt thou free thyself from the pitiless doom
meted out by the gods."

Shaking with sobs, Psyche made answer:

"I love him so!... I love him so!"

And her sisters turned upon her with furious scorn and well-simulated
wrath.

"Shameless one!" they cried; "and does our father's daughter confess
to a thing so unutterable! Only by slaying the monster canst thou hope
to regain thy place amongst the daughters of men."

They left her when evening fell, carrying with them their royal gifts.
And while she awaited the coming of her lord, Psyche, provided with
knife and lamp, crouched with her head in her hands, a lily broken by
a cruel storm. So glad was Eros to come back to her, to find her
safely there--for greatly had he feared the coming of that treacherous
pair--that he did not note her silence. Nor did the dark night show
him that her eyes in her sad face looked like violets in a snow
wreath. He wanted only to hold her safely in his arms, and there she
lay, passive and still, until sleep came to lay upon him an omnipotent
hand. Then, very gently, she withdrew herself from his embrace, and
stole to the place where her lamp was hidden. Her limbs shook under
her as she brought it to the couch where he lay asleep; her arm
trembled as she held it aloft.

As a martyr walks to death, so did she walk. And when the yellow light
fell upon the form of him who lay there, still she gazed steadily.

And, lo, before her she saw the form of him who had ever been the
ideal of her dreams. Love himself, incarnate Love, perfect in beauty
and in all else was he whom her sisters had told her was a
monster--he, of whom the oracle had said that neither gods nor men
could resist him. For a moment of perfect happiness she gazed upon his
beauty. Then he turned in his sleep, and smiled, and stretched out
his arms to find the one of his love. And Psyche started, and,
starting, shook the lamp; and from it fell a drop of burning oil on
the white shoulder of Eros. At once he awoke, and with piteous,
pitying eyes looked in those of Psyche. And when he spoke, his words
were like daggers that pierced deep into her soul. He told her all
that had been, all that might have been. Had she only had faith and
patience to wait, an immortal life should have been hers.

    "Farewell! though I, a god, can never know
    How thou canst lose thy pain, yet time will go
    Over thine head, and thou mayst mingle yet
    The bitter and the sweet, nor quite forget,
    Nor quite remember, till these things shall seem
    The wavering memory of a lovely dream."

        William Morris.

He left her alone then, with her despair, and as the slow hours
dragged by, Psyche, as she awaited the dawn, felt that in her heart no
sun could ever rise again. When day came at last, she felt she could
no longer endure to stay in the palace where everything spoke to her
of the infinite tenderness of a lost love. Through the night a storm
had raged, and even with the day there came no calm. And Psyche, weary
and chill, wandered away from the place of her happiness, onward and
ever on, until she stood on the bank of a swift-flowing river. For a
little she stayed her steps and listened to the sound of its wash
against the rocks and tree roots as it hurried past, and to her as she
waited came the thought that here had she found a means by which to
end her woe.

"I have lost my Love," she moaned. "What is Life to me any longer!
Come to me then, O Death!"

So then she sprang into the wan water, hoping that very swiftly it
might bear her grief-worn soul down to the shades. But the river bore
her up and carried her to its shallows in a fair meadow where Pan
himself sat on the bank and merrily dabbled his feet in the flowing
water. And when Psyche, shamed and wet, looked at him with sad eyes,
the god spoke to her gently and chid her for her folly. She was too
young and much too fair to try to end her life so rudely, he said. The
river gods would never be so unkind as to drive so beautiful a maiden
in rough haste down to the Cocytus valley.

"Thou must dree thy weird like all other daughters of men, fair
Psyche," he said. "He or she who fain would lose their lives, are ever
held longest in life. Only when the gods will it shall thy days on
earth be done."

And Psyche, knowing that in truth the gods had spared her to endure
more sorrow, looked in his face with a very piteous gaze, and wandered
on. As she wandered, she found that her feet had led her near the
place where her two sisters dwelt.

"I shall tell them of the evil they have wrought," she thought.
"Surely they must sorrow when they know that by their cruel words they
stole my faith from me and robbed me of my Love and of my happiness."

Gladly the two women saw the stricken form of Psyche and looked at her
face, all marred by grief. Well, indeed, had their plot succeeded;
their malice had drunk deep, yet deeper still they drank, for with
scornful laughter they drove her from their palace doors. Very
quickly, when she had gone, the elder sought the place where she had
stood when Zephyrus bore her in safety to that palace of pleasure
where Psyche dwelt with her Love. Now that Psyche was no longer there,
surely the god by whom she had been beloved would gladly have as her
successor the beautiful woman who was now much more fair than the
white-faced girl with eyes all red with weeping. And such certainty
did the vengeful gods put in her heart that she held out her arms, and
calling aloud:

"Bear me to him in thine arms, Zephyrus! Behold I come, my lord!" she
sprang from the high cliff on which she stood, into space. And the
ravens that night feasted on her shattered body. So also did it befall
the younger sister, deluded by the Olympians to her own destruction,
so that her sin might be avenged.

For many a weary day and night Psyche wandered, ever seeking to find
her Love, ever longing to do something by which to atone for the deed
that had been her undoing. From temple to temple she went, but nowhere
did she come near him, until at length in Cyprus she came to the place
where Aphrodite herself had her dwelling. And inasmuch as her love had
made her very bold, and because she no longer feared death, nor could
think of pangs more cruel than those that she already knew, Psyche
sought the presence of the goddess who was her enemy, and humbly
begged her to take her life away.

With flaming scorn and anger Aphrodite received her.

    "O thou fool," she said, "I will not let thee die!
    But thou shalt reap the harvest thou hast sown,
    And many a day that wretched lot bemoan;
    Thou art my slave, and not a day shall be
    But I will find some fitting task for thee."

There began then for Psyche a time of torturing misery of which only
those could speak who have knowledge of the merciless stripes with
which the goddess can scourge the hearts of her slaves. With cruel
ingenuity, Aphrodite invented labours for her.

In uncountable quantity, and mingled in inextricable and bewildering
confusion, there lay in the granary of the goddess grains of barley
and of wheat, peas and millet, poppy and coriander seed. To sort out
each kind and lay them in heaps was the task allotted for one day, and
woe be to her did she fail. In despair, Psyche began her hopeless
labour. While the sun shone, through a day that was for her too short,
she strove to separate the grains, but when the shadows of evening
made it hard for her to distinguish one sort from another, only a few
very tiny piles were the result of her weary toil. Very soon the
goddess would return, and Psyche dared not think what would be the
punishment meted out to her. Rapidly the darkness fell, but while the
dying light still lingered in some parts of the granary, it seemed to
Psyche as though little dark trickles of water began to pour from
underneath the doors and through the cracks in the wall. Trembling she
watched the ceaseless motion of those long, dark lines, and then, in
amazement, realised that what she saw were unending processions of
ants. And as though one who loved her directed their labours, the
millions of busy little toilers swiftly did for Psyche what she
herself had failed to do. When at length they went away, in those long
dark lines that looked like the flow of a thread-like stream, the
grains were all piled up in high heaps, and the sad heart of Psyche
knew not only thankful relief, but had a thrill of gladness.

"Eros sent them to me:" she thought. "Even yet his love for me is not
dead."

And what she thought was true.

Amazed and angry, Aphrodite looked at the task she had deemed
impossible, well and swiftly performed. That Psyche should possess
such magic skill only incensed her more, and next day she said to her
new slave:

"Behold, on the other side of that glittering stream, my
golden-fleeced sheep crop the sweet flowers of the meadow. To-day must
thou cross the river and bring me back by evening a sample of wool
pulled from each one of their shining fleeces."

Then did Psyche go down to the brink of the river, and even as her
white feet splashed into the water, she heard a whisper of warning
from the reeds that bowed their heads by the stream.

"Beware! O Psyche," they said. "Stay on the shore and rest until the
golden-fleeced sheep lie under the shade of the trees in the evening
and the murmur of the river has lulled them to sleep."

But Psyche said, "Alas, I must do the bidding of the goddess. It will
take me many a weary hour to pluck the wool that she requires."

And again the reeds murmured, "Beware! for the golden-fleeced sheep,
with their great horns, are evil creatures that lust for the lives of
mortals, and will slay thee even as thy feet reach the other bank.
Only when the sun goes down does their vice depart from them, and
while they sleep thou canst gather of their wool from the bushes and
from the trunks of the trees."

And again the heart of Psyche felt a thrill of happiness, because she
knew that she was loved and cared for still. All day she rested in the
wood by the river and dreamt pleasant day-dreams, and when the sun had
set she waded to the further shore and gathered the golden wool in the
way that the reeds had told her. When in the evening she came to the
goddess, bearing her shining load, the brow of Aphrodite grew dark.

"If thou art so skilled in magic that no danger is danger to thee, yet
another task shall I give thee that is worthy of thy skill," she said,
and laid upon Psyche her fresh commands.

Sick with dread, Psyche set out next morning to seek the black stream
out of which Aphrodite had commanded her to fill a ewer. Part of its
waters flowed into the Styx, part into the Cocytus, and well did
Psyche know that a hideous death from the loathly creatures that
protected the fountain must be the fate of those who risked so proud
an attempt. Yet because she knew that she must "dree her weird," as
Pan had said, she plodded onward, towards that dark mountain from
whose side gushed the black water that she sought. And then, once
again, there came to her a message of love. A whirring of wings she
heard, and

    "O'er her head there flew the bird of Jove,
    The bearer, of his servant, friend of Love,
    Who, when he saw her, straightway towards her flew,
    And asked her why she wept, and when he knew,
    And who she was, he said, 'Cease all thy fear,
    For to the black waves I thy ewer will bear,
    And fill it for thee; but, remember me,
    When thou art come unto thy majesty.'"

And, yet once again, the stricken heart of Psyche was gladdened, and
when at nightfall she came with her ewer full of water from the dread
stream and gave it to Aphrodite, although she knew that a yet more
arduous task was sure to follow, her fear had all passed away.

With beautiful, sullen eyes, Aphrodite received her when she brought
the water. And, with black brow, she said: "If thou art so skilled in
magic that no danger is known to thee, I shall now give thee a task
all worthy of thy skill."

Thereon she told her that she must seek that dark valley where no
silver nor golden light ever strikes on the black waters of Cocytus
and of the Styx; and where Pluto reigns in gloomy majesty over the
restless shades. From Proserpine she was to crave for Aphrodite the
gift of a box of magical ointment, the secret of which was known to
the Queen of Darkness alone, and which was able to bring to those who
used it, beauty more exquisite than any that the eyes of gods or of
men had as yet looked upon.

"I grow weary and careworn," said Aphrodite, and she looked like a
rose that has budded in Paradise as she spoke. "My son was wounded by
a faithless slave in whom, most weakly, he put his trust, and in
tending to his wound, my beauty has faded."

And at these scornful words, the heart of Psyche leaped within her.

"In helping his mother, I shall help him!" she thought. And again she
thought, "I shall atone." And so, when day was come, she took her way
along the weary road that leads to that dark place from whence no
traveller can ever hope to return, and still with gladness in her
heart. But, as she went onward, "cold thoughts and dreadful fears"
came to her.

"Better were it for me to hasten my journey to the shades," she
thought.

And when she came to an old grey tower, that seemed like an old man
that Death has forgotten, she resolved to throw herself down from it,
and thus swiftly to find herself at her journey's end. But as she
stood on the top of the tower, her arms outstretched, like a white
butterfly that poises its wings for flight, a voice spoke in her ear.

"Oh, foolish one," it said, "why dost thou strive to stay the hope
that is not dead?" And while she held her breath, her great eyes wide
open, the voice spoke on, and told her by what means she might
speedily reach Hades and there find means to face with courage the
King of Darkness himself and his fair wife, Proserpine.

All that she was bidden to do, Psyche did, and so at last did she
come before the throne of Proserpine, and all that Psyche endured, all
that she saw, all that through which she came with bleeding heart and
yet with unscathed soul, cannot here be written.

To her Proserpine gave the box of precious ointment that Aphrodite
described, and gladly she hastened homeward. Good, indeed, it was to
her when again she reached the fair light of day. Yet, when she had
won there, there came to Psyche a winged thought, that beat against
the stern barriers of her mind like a little moth against a window.

"This ointment that I carry with me," said Psyche to herself, "is an
ointment that will bring back to those all faded by time, or worn by
suffering, a beauty greater than any beauty that has joyed the
Immortals!" And then she thought:

"For my beauty, Eros--_Love_--loved me; and now my beauty is worn and
wasted and well-nigh gone. Were I to open this box and make use of the
ointment of Proserpine, then indeed I should be fair enough to be the
bride of him who, even now, believes that he loves me--of Eros whose
love is my life!"

So it came to pass that she opened the fateful box. And out of it
there came not Beauty, but Sleep, that put his gyves upon her limbs,
and on her eyelids laid heavy fingers. And Psyche sank down by the
wayside, the prisoner of Sleep.

But Eros, who had loved her ever, with a love that knew the ebb and
flow of no tides, rose from his bed and went in search of her who had
braved even the horrors of Hades for his dear sake. And by the wayside
he found her, fettered by sleep. Her little oval face was white as a
snowdrop. Like violets were her heavy eyelids, and underneath her
sleeping eyes a violet shadow lay. Once had her mouth been as the bow
of Eros, painted in carmine. Now either end of the bow was turned
downwards, and its colour was that of a faded rose-leaf.

And as Eros looked at her that he loved, pity stirred his heart, as
the wind sweeps through the sighing, grey leaves of the willow, or
sings through the bowing reeds.

"My _Belovèd_!" he said, and he knew that Psyche was indeed his
beloved. It was her fair soul that he loved, nor did it matter to him
whether her body was like a rose in June or as a wind-scourged tree in
December. And as his lips met hers, Psyche awoke, and heard his soft
whisper:

               "Dear, unclose thine eyes.
    Thou mayst look on me now. I go no more,
    But am thine own forever."

        Lewis Morris.

Then did there spring from the fair white shoulders of Psyche, wings
of silver and of gold, and, hand in hand with Eros, she winged her way
to Olympus.

And there all the deathless gods were assembled, and Aphrodite no
longer looked upon her who had once been her slave with darkened
brows, but smiled upon her as the sun smiles upon a new-born flower.
And when into the hand of Psyche there was placed a cup of gold, the
voice of the great Father and King of Olympus rang out loud and clear:

    "Drink now, O beautiful, and have no fear!
    For with this draught shalt thou be born again,
    And live for ever free from care and pain."

        William Morris.

In this wise did Psyche, a human soul, attain by bitter suffering to
the perfect happiness of purified love.

And still do we watch the butterfly, which is her emblem, bursting
from its ugly tomb in the dark soil, and spreading joyous white and
gold-powdered wings in the caressing sunshine, amidst the radiance and
the fragrance of the summer flowers. Still, too, do we sadly watch her
sister, the white moth, heedlessly rushing into pangs unutterable,
thoughtlessly seeking the anguish that brings her a cruel death.




THE CALYDONIAN HUNT


Œneus and Althæa were king and queen of Calydon, and to them was
born a son who was his mother's joy and yet her bitterest sorrow.
Meleager was his name, and ere his birth his mother dreamed a dream
that the child that she bore was a burning firebrand. But when the
baby came he was a royal child indeed, a little fearless king from the
first moment that his eyes, like unseeing violets, gazed steadily up
at his mother. To the chamber where he lay by his mother's side came
the three Fates, spinning, ceaselessly spinning.

"He shall be strong," said one, as she span her thread. "He shall be
fortunate and brave," said the second. But the third laid a billet of
wood on the flames, and while her withered fingers held the fatal
threads, she looked with old, old, sad eyes at the new-born child.

"To thee, O New-Born," she said, "and to this wood that burns, do we
give the same span of days to live."

From her bed sprang Althæa, and, heedless of the flames, she seized
the burning wood, trod on it with her fair white feet, and poured on
it water that swiftly quenched its red glow. "Thou shalt live forever,
O Beloved," she said, "for never again shall fire char the brand that
I have plucked from the burning."

And the baby laughed.

    "Those grey women with bound hair
    Who fright the gods frighted not him; he laughed
    Seeing them, and pushed out hands to feel and haul
    Distaff and thread."

The years sped on, and from fearless and beautiful babyhood, Meleager
grew into gallant boyhood, and then into magnificent youth. When Jason
and his heroes sailed away into a distant land to win the Golden
Fleece, Meleager was one of the noble band. From all men living he won
great praise for his brave deeds, and when the tribes of the north and
west made war upon Ætolia, he fought against their army and scattered
it as a wind in autumn drives the fallen leaves before it.

But his victory brought evil upon him. When his father Œneus, at
the end of a fruitful year, offered sacrifices to the gods, he omitted
to honour the goddess Diana by sacrificing to her, and to punish his
neglect, she had sent this destroying army. When Meleager was victor,
her wrath against his father grew yet more hot, and she sent a wild
boar, large as the bulls of Epirus, and fierce and savage to kill and
to devour, that it might ravage and lay waste the land of Calydon. The
fields of corn were trampled under foot, the vineyards laid waste, and
the olive groves wrecked as by a winter hurricane. Flocks and herds
were slaughtered by it, or driven hither and thither in wild panic,
working havoc as they fled. Many went out to slay it, but went only to
find a hideous death. Then did Meleager resolve that he would rid the
land of this monster, and called on all his friends, the heroes of
Greece, to come to his aid. Theseus and his friend Pirithous came;
Jason; Peleus, afterwards father of Achilles; Telamon, the father of
Ajax; Nestor, then but a youth; Castor and Pollux, and Toxeus and
Plexippus, the brothers of Althæa, the fair queen-mother. But there
came none more fearless nor more ready to fight the monster boar of
Calydon than Atalanta, the daughter of the king of Arcadia. When
Atalanta was born, her father heard of her birth with anger. He
desired no daughter, but only sturdy sons who might fight for him, and
in the furious rage of bitter disappointment he had the baby princess
left on the Parthenian Hill that she might perish there. A she-bear
heard the baby's piteous cries, and carried it off to its lair, where
she suckled it along with her young, and there the little Atalanta
tumbled about and played with her furry companions and grew strong and
vigorous as any other wild young creature of the forest.

Some hunters came one day to raid the den and kill the foster-mother,
and found, amazed, a fearless, white-skinned thing with rosy cheeks
and brave eyes, who fought for her life and bit them as did her fierce
foster-brothers, and then cried human tears of rage and sorrow when
she saw the bear who had been her mother lying bloody and dead. Under
the care of the hunters Atalanta grew into a maiden, with all the
beauty of a maid and all the strength and the courage of a man. She
ran as swiftly as Zephyrus runs when he rushes up from the west and
drives the white clouds before him like a flock of timid fawns that a
hound is pursuing. The shafts that her strong arm sped from her bow
smote straight to the heart of the beast that she chased, and almost
as swift as her arrow was she there to drive her spear into her
quarry. When at length her father the king learned that the beautiful
huntress, of whom all men spoke as of one only a little lower than
Diana, was none other than his daughter, he was not slow to own her as
his child. So proud was he of her beauty and grace, and of her
marvellous swiftness of foot and skill in the chase, that he would
fain have married her to one of the great ones of Greece, but Atalanta
had consulted an oracle. "Marry not," said the oracle. "To thee
marriage must bring woe."

So, with untouched heart, and with the daring and the courage of a
young lad, Atalanta came along with the heroes to the Calydonian Hunt.
She was so radiantly lovely, so young, so strong, so courageous, that
straightway Meleager loved her, and all the heroes gazed at her with
eyes that adored her beauty. And Diana, looking down at her, also
loved the maiden whom from childhood she had held in her protection--a
gallant, fearless virgin dear to her heart.

The grey mist rose from the marshes as the hunt began, and the hunters
of the boar had gone but a little way when they came upon traces of
the hated boar. Disembowelled beasts marked its track. Here, in a
flowery meadow, had it wallowed. There, in rich wheat land, had it
routed, and the marks of its bestial tusks were on the gashed grey
trunks of the trees that had once lived in the peace of a fruitful
olive grove.

In a marsh they found their enemy, and all the reeds quivered as it
heaved its vast bulk and hove aside the weed in which it had wallowed,
and rooted with its tusks amongst the wounded water-lilies before it
leapt with a snort to meet and to slay the men who had come against
it. A filthy thing it was, as its pink snout rose above the green ooze
of the marshes, and it looked up lustingly, defying the purity of the
blue skies of heaven, to bring to those who came against it a cruel,
shameful death.

Upon it, first of all, Jason cast his spear. But the sharp point only
touched it, and unwounded, the boar rushed on, its gross, bristly head
down, to disembowel, if it could, the gallant Nestor. In the branches
of a tree Nestor found safety, and Telamon rushed on to destroy the
filthy thing that would have made carrion of the sons of the gods. A
straggling cypress root caught his fleeting foot and laid him prone, a
helpless prey for the rooting brute. His hounds fell before it, but
ere it could reach him, Atalanta, full of vengeful rage--the pure
angered against the filthy and cruel--let draw her bow, with a prayer
to Diana to guide her shaft aright. Into the boar's smoking flank sped
the arrow.

                      "The sudden string
    Rang, and sprang inward, and the waterish air
    Hissed, and the moist plumes of the songless reeds
    Moved as a wave which the wind moves no more.
    But the boar heaved half out of ooze and slime,
    His tense flank trembling round the barbed wound,
    Hateful; and fiery with invasive eyes
    And bristling with intolerable hair
    Plunged, and the hounds clung, and green flowers and white
    Reddened and broke all round them where they came.
    And charging with sheer tusk he drove, and smote
    Hyleus; and sharp death caught his sudden soul,
    And violent sleep shed night upon his eyes."

        Swinburne.

More than ever terrible was the monster now that it was wounded. One
after the other the hunters fell before its mad rage, and were sent to
the shades by a bloody and merciless death.

Before its furious charge even the heart of a hero might have been
stricken. Yet Meleager, like a mighty oak of the forest that will not
sway even a little before the rush of a storm, stood full in its way
and met its onslaught.

    "Aimed on the left side his well-handled spear
    Grasped where the ash was knottiest hewn, and smote,
    And with no missile wound, the monstrous boar
    Right in the hairiest hollow of his hide
    Under the last rib, sheer through bulk and bone,
    Deep in; and deeply smitten, and to death,
    The heavy horror with his hanging shafts,
    Leapt, and fell furiously, and from raging lips
    Foamed out the latest wrath of all his life."

Great was the shout that rose from those who still lived when that
grim hunt thus came to an end. And when, with his keen blade, Meleager
struck off the head, even as the quivering throat drew its last
agonised breath, louder still shouted the men of Greece. But not for
himself did Meleager despoil the body of his foe. He laid the ugly
thing at the feet of Atalanta.

"This is thy spoil, not mine," he said. "The wounding shaft was sped
by thee. To thee belongs the praise."

And Atalanta blushed rosily, and laughed low and gladly, not only
because Diana had heard her prayer and helped her slay the beast, but
for happiness that Meleager was so noble in his giving.

At that the brows of the heroes grew dark, and angrily one cried:

                                "Lo, now,
    Shall not the Arcadian shoot out lips at us,
    Saying all we were despoiled by this one girl."

Like a spark that kindles the dry grass, their kindling anger spread,
and they rushed against Atalanta, seized the trophy she had been
given, and smote her as though she were but a shameless wanton and not
the noble daughter of a king.

And because the heart of Meleager was given very wholly to the fair
huntress, and because those whom he deemed his friends had not only
dishonoured her, but had done him a very grievous wrong, a great rage
seized him. Right and left he smote, and they who had been most bitter
in their jealousy of Atalanta, the two brothers of his own mother,
were laid low in death.

Tidings of the slaying of the boar had been brought to Althæa by swift
messengers, and she was on her way to the temples bearing gifts to the
gods for the victory of her son, when she beheld the slow-footed
procession of those who bore the bodies of the dead. And when she saw
the still faces of her two dear brothers, quickly was her joy turned
into mourning. Terrible was her grief and anger when she learned by
whose hand they were slain, and her mother's love and pride dried up
in her heart like the clear water of a fountain before the scorching
of a devouring fire. No sacrifices to the gods would she offer, but
her dead brothers should have the greatest sacrifice that mother could
make to atone for the guilt of her son. Back to the palace she went,
and from its safe hiding-place drew out the brand that she had rescued
from the flames when Meleager the hero was but a babe that made his
mother's heart sing for joy. She commanded a fire to be prepared, and
four times, as its flames blazed aloft, she tried to lay the brand
upon the pile. Yet four times she drew back, and then at last she
threw into the reddest of the ashes the charred brand that for a
little she held so close to her breast that it seemed as though she
fondled her child.

A wreath of leaves as sign of victory was being placed on Atalanta's
beautiful head by the adoring hands of Meleager when his mother gave
him his doom. Through his body there rushed a pang of mortal agony.
His blood turned to fire, and the hand of Death that smote him was as
a hand of molten lead. In torture his gallant spirit passed away,
uncomplaining, loving through his pain the maid for whose dear sake he
had brought woe upon himself. As the last white ashes in the fire
crumbled and fell away into nothingness, the soul of Meleager
departed. Swiftly through the dark valley his mother's shade followed
him, for she fell upon a sword and so perished. And Diana, looking
down on the grief-stricken sisters of Meleager and on the bitter
sorrow of his father, had compassion on them and turned them into
birds.

So ended the Calydonian Hunt, and Atalanta returned to Arcadia, heavy
at heart for the evil she had wrought unwittingly. And still the Three
Fates span on, and the winds caught up the cold wood ashes and blew
them across the ravaged land that Meleager had saved and that quickly
grew fertile again.




ATALANTA


Atalanta, daughter of the king of Arcadia, returned sad at heart to
her own land. Only as comrades, as those against whose skill in the
chase she was wont to pit her own skill, had she looked upon men. But
Meleager, the hero who loved her and her fair honour more than life
itself, and whose love had made him haste in all his gallant strength
and youthful beauty to the land of the Shades, was one to touch her as
never before had she been touched. Her father, proud of her triumph in
Calydon, again besought her to marry one of her many noble suitors.

"If indeed they love me as thou sayest," said Atalanta to her father,
"then must they be ready to face for my sake even the loss of dear
life itself. I shall be the prize of him who outruns me in a
foot-race. But he who tries and fails, must pay to Death his penalty."

Thereafter, for many days, a strange sight was to be seen in Arcadia.
For one after another the suitors came to race with the maiden whose
face had bewitched them, though truly the race was no more fair to him
who ran than would be a race with Death. No mortal man was as fleet as
Atalanta, who had first raced with the wild things of the mountains
and the forests, and who had dared at last to race with the winds and
leave even them behind. To her it was all a glorious game. Her
conquest was always sure, and if the youths who entered in the contest
cared to risk their lives, why should they blame her? So each day they
started, throbbing hope and fierce determination to win her in the
heart of him who ran--fading hope and despairing anger as he saw her
skimming ahead of him like a gay-hued butterfly that a tired child
pursues in vain. And each day, as the race ended, another man paid the
price of his defeat.

Daily, amongst those who looked on, stood her cousin Milanion. He
would fain have hated Atalanta for her ruthlessness and her joyousness
as he saw his friends die for her sake, yet daily her beauty, her
purity, and her gallant unconsciousness took a firmer hold upon his
heart. To himself he vowed that he would win Atalanta, but not without
help from the gods was this possible. Therefore he sought Aphrodite
herself and asked her aid.

Milanion was a beautiful youth, and to Aphrodite, who loved beauty, he
pled his cause as he told her how Atalanta had become to him more than
life, so that he had ceased to pity the youths, his friends, who had
died for love of her. The goddess smiled upon him with gentle
sympathy.

In the garden of her temple grew a tree with branches and twigs of
gold, and leaves as yellow as the little leaves of the silver birch
when the autumn sun kisses them as it sets. On this tree grew golden
apples, and Aphrodite plucked three of them and gave them to the youth
who had not feared to ask her to aid him to win the maid he loved.
How he was to use the apples she then told him, and, well content,
Milanion returned home.

Next day he spoke to Atalanta.

"So far has victory been thine, Fairest on earth," he said, "but so
far have thy little winged white feet had only the heavy-footed
laggards to outrun. Wilt have me run a race with thee? for assuredly I
shall win thee for my own."

And Milanion looked into the eyes of Atalanta with a smile as gay and
fearless as that with which a hero is wont to look in the eyes of his
fellow.

Look for look did the virgin huntress give him.

Then her cheeks grew red, as though the rosy-fingered dawn had touched
them, and the dawning of love came into her heart.

Even Meleager was not quite so goodly a youth as this. Not even
Meleager had been so wholly fearless.

"Thou art tempted by the deathless gods," she said, but her long
lashes drooped on her cheek as she spoke. "I pity you, Milanion, for
when thou dost race with me, the goal is assuredly the meadows of
asphodel near where sit Pluto and Persephone on their gloomy thrones."

But Milanion said, "I am ready, Atalanta. Wilt race with me now?" And
steadily he looked in her eyes until again they fell as though at last
they had found a conqueror.

Like two swallows that skim across a sunny sea, filled with the
joyousness of the coming of spring, Atalanta and Milanion started.
Scarcely did their feet seem to touch the solid earth, and all
those who stood by vowed that now, at length, was a race indeed, a
race worthy for the gods to behold.

[Illustration: SHE STOPPED, AND PICKED UP THE TREASURE]

But as they ran, almost abreast, so that none could tell which was the
gainer, Milanion obeyed the bidding of Aphrodite and let fall one of
the golden apples. Never before had Atalanta dreamed of such a
thing--an apple of glistening gold! She stopped, poised on one foot as
a flying bird poises for a moment on the wing, and picked up the
treasure. But Milanion had sped several paces ahead ere she was again
abreast of him, and even as she gained on him, he dropped the second
apple. Again Atalanta was tempted. Again she stopped, and again
Milanion shot ahead of her. Her breath came short and fast, as once
more she gained the ground that she had lost. But, yet a third time,
Milanion threw in her way one of the golden illusions of the gods.
And, yet again, Atalanta stooped to pick up the apple of gold.

Then a mighty shout from those who watched rent the air, and Atalanta,
half fearful, half ashamed, yet wholly happy, found herself running,
vanquished, into the arms of him who was indeed her conqueror. For not
only had Milanion won the race, but he had won the heart of the virgin
huntress, a heart once as cold and remote as the winter snow on the
peak of Mount Olympus.




ARACHNE


The hay that so short a time ago was long, lush grass, with fragrant
meadow-sweet and gold-eyed marguerites growing amongst it in the green
meadow-land by the river, is now dry hay--fragrant still, though dead,
and hidden from the sun's warm rays underneath the dark wooden rafters
of the barn. Occasionally a cat on a hunting foray comes into the barn
to look for mice, or to nestle cosily down into purring slumber. Now
and then a hen comes furtively tip-toeing through the open door and
makes for itself a secret nest in which to lay the eggs which it
subsequently heralds with such loud clucks of proud rejoicing as to
completely undo all its previous precautions. Sometimes children come
in, pursuing cat or hen, or merely to tumble each other over amongst
the soft hay which they leave in chaotic confusion, and when they have
gone away, a little more of the sky can be seen through the little
window in the roof, and through the wooden bars of the window lower
down. Yet, whatever other living creatures may come or go, by those
windows of the barn, and high up on its dark rafters, there is always
a living creature working, ceaselessly working. When, through the
skylight, the sun-god drives a golden sunbeam, and a long shaft of
dancing dust-atoms passes from the window to what was once a part of
the early summer's glory, the work of the unresting toiler is also to
be seen, for the window is hung with shimmering grey tapestries made
by Arachne, the spider, and from rafter to rafter her threads are
suspended with inimitable skill.

She was a nymph once, they say--the daughter of Idmon the dyer, of
Colophon, a city of Lydia. In all Lydia there was none who could weave
as wove the beautiful Arachne. To watch her card the wool of the
white-fleeced sheep until in her fingers it grew like the soft clouds
that hang round the hill tops, was pleasure enough to draw nymphs from
the golden river Pactolus and from the vineyards of Tymolus. And when
she drove her swift shuttle hither and thither, still it was joy to
watch her wondrous skill. Magical was the growth of the web, fine of
woof, that her darting fingers span, and yet more magical the
exquisite devices that she then wrought upon it. For birds and flowers
and butterflies and pictures of all the beautiful things on earth were
limned by Arachne, and old tales grew alive again under her creative
needle.

To Pallas Athené, goddess of craftsmen, came tidings that at Colophon
in Lydia lived a nymph whose skill rivalled that of the goddess
herself, and she, ever jealous for her own honour, took on herself the
form of a woman bent with age, and, leaning on her staff, joined the
little crowd that hung round Arachne as she plied her busy needle.
With white arms twined round each other the eager nymphs watched the
flowers spring up under her fingers, even as flowers spring from the
ground on the coming of Demeter, and Athené was fain to admire, while
she marvelled at the magic skill of the fair Arachne.

Gently she spoke to Arachne, and, with the persuasive words of a wise
old woman, warned her that she must not let her ambition soar too
high. Greater than all skilled craftswomen was the great goddess
Athené, and were Arachne, in impious vanity, to dream that one day she
might equal her, that were indeed a crime for any god to punish.

Glancing up for a moment from the picture whose perfect colours grew
fast under her slim fingers, Arachne fixed scornful eyes on the old
woman and gave a merry laugh.

"Didst say _equal_ Athené? old mother," she said. "In good sooth thy
dwelling must be with the goat-herds in the far-off hills and thou art
not a dweller in our city. Else hadst thou not spoken to Arachne of
_equalling_ the work of Athené; _excelling_ were the better word."

In anger Pallas Athené made answer.

"Impious one!" she said, "to those who would make themselves higher
than the gods must ever come woe unutterable. Take heed what thou
sayest, for punishment will assuredly be thine."

Laughing still, Arachne made reply:

"I fear not, Athené, nor does my heart shake at the gloomy warning of
a foolish old crone." And turning to the nymphs who, half afraid,
listened to her daring words, she said: "Fair nymphs who watch me day
by day, well do ye know that I make no idle boast. My skill is as
great as that of Athené, and greater still it shall be. Let Athené try
a contest with me if she dare! Well do I know who will be the victor."

Then Athené cast off her disguise, and before the frightened nymphs
and the bold Arachne stood the radiant goddess with eyes that blazed
with anger and insulted pride.

"Lo, Athené is come!" she said, and nymphs and women fell on their
knees before her, humbly adoring. Arachne alone was unabashed. Her
cheeks showed how fast her heart was beating. From rosy red to white
went the colour in them, yet, in firm, low voice she spoke.

"I have spoken truth," she said. "Not woman, nor goddess, can do work
such as mine. Ready am I to abide by what I have said, and if I did
boast, by my boast I stand. If thou wilt deign, great goddess, to try
thy skill against the skill of the dyer's daughter and dost prove the
victor, behold me gladly willing to pay the penalty."

The eyes of Athené, the grey-eyed goddess, grew dark as the sea when a
thunder-cloud hangs over it and a mighty storm is coming. Not for one
moment did she delay, but took her place by the side of Arachne. On
the loom they stretched out two webs with a fine warp, and made them
fast on the beam.

    "The sley separates the warp, the woof is inserted in
    the middle with sharp shuttles, which the fingers hurry
    along, and, being drawn within the warp, the teeth
    notched in the moving sley strike it. Both hasten on,
    and girding up their garments to their breasts, they
    move their skilful arms, their eagerness beguiling their
    fatigue. There both the purple is being woven, which is
    subjected to the Tyrian brazen vessel, and fine shades
    of minute difference; just as the rainbow, with its
    mighty arch, is wont to tint a long tract of sky by
    means of the rays reflected by the shower; in which,
    though a thousand different colours are shining, yet the
    very transition eludes the eyes that look upon it....
    There, too, the pliant gold is mixed with the threads."

        Ovid.

Their canvases wrought, then did Athené and Arachne hasten to cover
them with pictures such as no skilled worker of tapestry has ever
since dreamed of accomplishing. Under the fingers of Athené grew up
pictures so real and so perfect that the watchers knew not whether the
goddess was indeed creating life. And each picture was one that told
of the omnipotence of the gods and of the doom that came upon those
mortals who had dared in their blasphemous presumption to struggle as
equals with the immortal dwellers in Olympus. Arachne glanced up from
her web and looked with eyes that glowed with the love of beautiful
things at the creations of Athené. Yet, undaunted, her fingers still
sped on, and the goddess saw, with brow that grew yet more clouded,
how the daughter of Idmon the dyer had chosen for subjects the tales
that showed the weaknesses of the gods. One after another the living
pictures grew beneath her hand, and the nymphs held their breath in
mingled fear and ecstasy at Arachne's godlike skill and most arrogant
daring. Between goddess and mortal none could have chosen, for the
colour and form and exquisite fancy of the pictures of the daughter of
Zeus were equalled, though not excelled, by those of the daughter of
the dyer of Colophon.

Darker and yet more dark grew the eyes of Athené as they looked on
the magical beauty of the pictures, each one of which was an insult to
the gods. What picture had skilful hand ever drawn to compare with
that of Europa who,

    "riding on the back of the divine bull, with one hand
    clasped the beast's great horn, and with the other
    caught up her garment's purple fold, lest it might trail
    and be drenched in the hoar sea's infinite spray. And
    her deep robe was blown out in the wind, like the sail
    of a ship, and lightly ever it wafted the maiden
    onward."

        Moschus.

Then at last did the storm break, and with her shuttle the enraged
goddess smote the web of Arachne, and the fair pictures were rent into
motley rags and ribbons. Furiously, too, with her shuttle of boxwood
she smote Arachne. Before her rage, the nymphs fled back to their
golden river and to the vineyards of Tymolus, and the women of
Colophon in blind terror rushed away. And Arachne, shamed to the dust,
knew that life for her was no longer worth possessing. She had
aspired, in the pride of her splendid genius, to a contest with a god,
and knew now that such a contest must ever be vain. A cord hung from
the weaver's beam, and swiftly she seized it, knotted it round her
white neck, and would have hanged herself. But ere the life had passed
out of her, Athené grasped the cord, loosened it, and spoke Arachne's
doom:

"Live!" she said, "O guilty and shameless one! For evermore shalt thou
live and hang as now, thou and thy descendants, that men may never
forget the punishment of the blasphemous one who dared to rival a
god."

Even as she spoke, Arachne's fair form dried up and withered. Her
straight limbs grew grey and crooked and wiry, and her white arms were
no more. And from the beam where the beautiful weaver of Lydia had
been suspended, there hung from a fine grey thread the creature from
which, to this day, there are but few who do not turn with loathing.
Yet still Arachne spins, and still is without a compeer.

    "Not anie damzell, which her vaunteth most
    In skilfull knitting of soft silken twyne,
    Nor anie weaver, which his worke doth boast
    In dieper, in damaske, or in lyne,
    Nor anie skil'd in workmanship embost,
    Nor anie skil'd in loupes of fingring fine,
    Might in their divers cunning ever dare
    With this so curious networke to compare."

        Spenser.

Thus, perhaps, does Arachne have her compensations, and in days that
followed long after the twilight of the gods, did she not gain eternal
honour in the heart of every Scot by the tale of how she saved a
national hero? Kindly, too, are her labours for men as she slays their
mortal enemies, the household flies, and when the peasant--practical,
if not favoured by Æsculapius and Hygeia--runs to raid the loom of
Arachne in order to staunch the quick-flowing blood from the cut hand
of her little child, much more dear to her heart is Arachne the spider
than the unknown Athené.

    "Also in spinners be tokens of divination, and of
    knowing what weather shall fall--for oft by weathers
    that shall fall, some spin or weave higher or lower.
    Also multitude of spinners is token of much
    rain."

        Bartholomew.

The sun has not long enough shown his face to dry up the dew in the
garden, and behold on the little clipped tree of boxwood, a great
marvel! For in and out, and all over its twigs and leaves, Arachne has
woven her web, and on the web the dew has dropped a million diamond
drops. And, suddenly, all the colours in the sky are mirrored
dazzlingly on the grey tapestry of her making. Arachne has come to her
own again.




IDAS AND MARPESSA


By day, while the sun-god drove his chariot in the high heavens and
turned the blue-green Ægean Sea into the semblance of a blazing shield
of brass, Idas and Marpessa sat together in the trees' soft shades, or
walked in shadowy valleys where violets and wild parsley grew, and
where Apollo rarely deigned to come. At eventide, when, in royal
splendour of purple and crimson and gold, Apollo sought his rest in
the western sky, Idas and Marpessa wandered by the seashore watching
the little wavelets softly kissing the pebbles on the beach, or
climbed to the mountain side from whence they could see the first
glimpse of Diana's silver crescent and the twinkling lights of the
Pleiades breaking through the blue canopy of the sky. While Apollo
sought in heaven and on earth the best means to gratify his imperial
whims, Idas, for whom all joys had come to mean but one, sought ever
to be by the side of Marpessa. Shadowy valley, murmuring sea, lonely
mountain side, or garden where grew the purple amaranth and where
roses of pink and amber-yellow and deepest crimson dropped their
radiant petals on the snowy marble paths, all were the same to
Idas--Paradise for him, were Marpessa by his side; without her, dreary
desert.

More beautiful than any flower that grew in the garden was Marpessa.
No music that Apollo's lute could make was as sweet in the ears of
Idas as her dear voice. Its music was ever new to him--a melody to
make his heart more quickly throb. New, too, ever was her beauty. For
him it was always the first time that they met, always the same fresh
ravishment to look in her eyes. And when to Idas came the knowledge
that Marpessa gave him love for love, he had indeed won happiness so
great as to draw upon him the envy of the gods.

"The course of true love never did run smooth," and, like many and
many another father since his day, Evenos, the father of Marpessa, was
bitterly opposed to a match where the bridegroom was rich only in
youth, in health, and in love. His beautiful daughter naturally seemed
to him worthy of something much more high. Thus it was an unhappy day
for Marpessa when, as she sat alone by the fountain which dripped
slowly down on the marble basin, and dreamed of her lover, Idas,
Apollo himself, led by caprice, noiselessly walked through the rose
bushes, whose warm petals dropped at his feet as he passed, and beheld
a maiden more fair than the fairest flower that grew. The hum of bees,
the drip, drip of the fountain, these lulled her mind and heart and
soothed her day-dreams, and Marpessa's red lips, curved like the bow
of Eros, smiled as she thought of Idas, the man she loved. Silently
Apollo watched her. This queen of all the roses was not fit to be the
bride of mortal man--Marpessa must be his.

To Evenos Apollo quickly imparted his desire. He was not used to
having his imperial wishes denied, nor was Evenos anxious to do so.
Here, indeed, was a match for his daughter. No insignificant mortal,
but the radiant sun-god himself! And to Marpessa he told what Apollo
wished, and Marpessa shyly looked at her reflection in the pool of the
fountain, and wondered if she were indeed beautiful enough to win the
love of a god.

"Am I in truth so wondrous fair?" she asked her father.

"Fair enough to mate with Apollo himself!" proudly answered Evenos.

And joyously Marpessa replied, "Ah, then am I happy indeed! I would be
beautiful for my Idas' sake!"

An angry man was her father. There was to be no more pleasant dallying
with Idas in the shadowy wood or by the seashore. In the rose garden
Apollo took his place and charmed Marpessa's ears with his music,
while her eyes could not but be charmed by his beauty. The god had no
doubts or fears. Only a little time he would give her, for a very
little only would he wait, and then undoubtedly this mortal maiden
would be his, her heart conquered as assuredly as the rays from his
chariot conquered the roses, whose warm crimson petals they strewed at
his feet. Yet as Marpessa looked and listened, her thoughts were often
far away and always her heart was with Idas. When Apollo played most
exquisitely to her it seemed that he put her love for Idas into music.
When he spoke to her of his love she thought, "Thus, and thus did Idas
speak," and a sudden memory of the human lad's halting words brought
to her heart a little gush of tenderness, and made her eyes sparkle
so that Apollo gladly thought, "Soon she will be mine."

[Illustration: MARPESSA SAT ALONE BY THE FOUNTAIN]

And all this while Idas schemed and plotted and planned a way in which
he could save his dear one from her obdurate father, and from the
passion of a god. He went to Neptune, told his tale, and begged him to
lend him a winged chariot in which he could fly away with Marpessa.
Neptune good-naturedly consented, and when Idas flew up from the
seashore one day, like a great bird that the tempests have blown
inland, Marpessa joyously sprang up beside her lover, and swiftly they
took flight for a land where in peace they might live and love
together. No sooner did Evenos realise that his daughter was gone,
than, in furious anger against her and her lover, he gave chase. One
has watched a hawk in pursuit of a pigeon or a bird of the moors and
seen it, a little dark speck at first, gradually growing larger and
more large until at length it dominated and conquered its prey,
swooping down from above, like an arrow from a bow, to bring with it
sudden death.

So at first it seemed that Evenos must conquer Idas and Marpessa in
the winged chariot of Neptune's lending. But onwards Idas drove the
chariot, ever faster and faster, until before the eyes of Marpessa the
trees of the forest grew into blurs of blue and brown, and the streams
and rivers as they flew past them were streaks of silver. Not until he
had reached the river Lycormas did the angry father own that his
pursuit had been in vain. Over the swift-flowing stream flew the
chariot driven by Idas, but Evenos knew that his horses, flecked with
white foam, pumping each breath from hearts that were strained to
breaking-point, no longer could go on with the chase. The passage of
that deep stream would destroy them. The fierce water would sweep the
wearied beasts down in its impelling current, and he with them. A
shamed man would he be forever. Not for a moment did he hesitate, but
drew his sharp sword from his belt and plunged it into the breast of
one steed and then of the other who had been so willing and who yet
had failed him in the end. And then, as they, still in their traces,
neighed shrilly aloud, and then fell over and died where they lay,
Evenos, with a great cry, leaped into the river. Over his head closed
the eddies of the peat-brown water. Once only did he throw up his arms
to ask the gods for mercy; then did his body drift down with the
stream, and his soul hastened downwards to the Shades. And from that
day the river Lycormas no more was known by that name, but was called
the river _Evenos_ forever.

Onwards, triumphantly, drove Idas, but soon he knew that a greater
than Evenos had entered in the chase, and that the jealous sun-god's
chariot was in pursuit of the winged car of Neptune. Quickly it gained
on him--soon it would have swept down on him--a hawk indeed, this
time, striking surely its helpless prey--but even as Apollo saw the
white face of Marpessa and knew that he was the victor, a mighty
thunderbolt that made the mountains shake, and rolled its echoes
through the lonely fastnesses of a thousand hills, was sent to earth
by Jupiter. While the echoes still re-echoed, there came from Olympus
the voice of Zeus himself.

"_Let her decide!_" he said.

Apollo, like a white flame blown backward by the wind, withheld his
hands that would have seized from Idas the woman who was his heart's
desire.

And then he spoke, and while his burning gaze was fixed upon her, and
his face, in beautiful fury, was more perfect than any exquisite
picture of her dreams, his voice was as the voice of the sea as it
calls to the shore in the moonlit hours, as the bird that sings in the
darkness of a tropic night to its longing mate.

"Marpessa!" he cried, "Marpessa! wilt thou not come to me? No woe nor
trouble, never any pain can touch me. Yet woe indeed was mine when
first I saw thy fairest face. For even now dost thou hasten to sorrow,
to darkness, to the dark-shadowed tomb. Thou art but mortal! thy
beauty is short-lived. Thy love for mortal man shall quickly fade and
die. Come to me, Marpessa, and my kisses on your lips shall make thee
immortal! Together we shall bring the sunbeams to a cold, dark land!
Together shall we coax the spring flowers from the still, dead earth!
Together we shall bring to men the golden harvest, and deck the trees
of autumn in our liveries of red and gold. I love thee, Marpessa--not
as mere mortal loves do I love thee. Come to me, Marpessa--my Love--my
Desire!"

When his voice was silent, it seemed as if the very earth itself with
all its thousand echoes still breathed his words: "Marpessa--my
Love--my Desire."

Abashed before the god's entreaties stood Idas. And the heart of
Marpessa was torn as she heard the burning words of the beautiful
Apollo still ringing through her head, and saw her mortal lover,
silent, white-lipped, gazing first at the god and then into her own
pale face. At length he spoke:

    "After such argument what can I plead?
    Or what pale promise make? Yet since it is
    In woman to pity rather than to aspire,
    A little I will speak. I love thee then
    Not only for thy body packed with sweet
    Of all this world, that cup of brimming June,
    That jar of violet wine set in the air,
    That palest rose sweet in the night of life;
    Nor for that stirring bosom all besieged
    By drowsing lovers, or thy perilous hair;
    Nor for that face that might indeed provoke
    Invasion of old cities; no, nor all
    Thy freshness stealing on me like strange sleep.
    Nor for this only do I love thee, but
    Because Infinity upon thee broods;
    And thou art full of whispers and of shadows.
    Thou meanest what the sea has striven to say
    So long, and yearned up the cliffs to tell;
    Thou art what all the winds have uttered not,
    What the still night suggesteth to the heart.
    Thy voice is like to music heard ere birth,
    Some spirit lute touched on a spirit sea;
    Thy face remembered is from other worlds,
    It has been died for, though I know not when,
    It has been sung of, though I know not where.
    It has the strangeness of the luring West,
    And of sad sea-horizons; beside thee
    I am aware of other times and lands,
    Of birth far-back, of lives in many stars.
    O beauty lone and like a candle clear
    In this dark country of the world! Thou art
    My woe, my early light, my music dying."

        Stephen Phillips.

Then Idas, in the humility that comes from perfect love, drooped low
his head, and was silent. In silence for a minute stood the three--a
god, a man, and a woman. And from on high the watching stars looked
down and marvelled, and Diana stayed for a moment the course of her
silver car to watch, as she thought, the triumph of her own invincible
brother.

From man to god passed the eyes of Marpessa, and back from god to man.
And the stars forgot to twinkle, and Diana's silver-maned horses pawed
the blue floor of the sky, impatient at the firm hand of the mistress
on the reins that checked their eager course.

Marpessa spoke at last, in low words that seemed to come "remembered
from other worlds."

For all the joys he offered her she thanked Apollo. What grander fate
for mortal woman than to rule the sunbeams--to bring bliss to the
earth and to the sons of men? What more could mortal woman crave than
the gift of immortality shared with one whose power ruled the vast
universe, and who still had stooped to lay the red roses of his
passionate love at her little, human feet? And yet--and yet--in that
sorrow-free existence that he promised, might there not still be
something awanting to one who had once known tears?

    "Yet I, being human, human sorrow miss."

Then were he indeed to give her the gift of immortal life, what value
were life to one whose beauty had withered as the leaves in autumn,
whose heart was tired and dead? What uglier fate than this, to endure
an endless existence in which no life was, yoked to one whose youth
was immortal, whose beauty was everlasting?

Then did she turn to Idas, who stood as one who awaits the judgment of
the judge in whose hands lies the power of meting out life or death.
Thus she spoke:

    "But if I live with Idas, then we two
    On the low earth shall prosper hand in hand
    In odours of the open field, and live
    In peaceful noises of the farm, and watch
    The pastoral fields burned by the setting sun.
    And he shall give me passionate children, not
    Some radiant god that will despise me quite,
    But clambering limbs and little hearts that err.
    ... So shall we live,
    And though the first sweet sting of love be past,
    The sweet that almost venom is; though youth,
    With tender and extravagant delight,
    The first and secret kiss by twilight hedge,
    The insane farewell repeated o'er and o'er,
    Pass off; there shall succeed a faithful peace;
    Beautiful friendship tried by sun and wind,
    Durable from the daily dust of life."

The sun-god frowned as her words fell from her lips. Even now, as she
looked at him, he held out his arms. Surely she only played with this
poor mortal youth. To him she must come, this rose who could own no
lesser god than the sun-god himself.

But Marpessa spoke on:

    "And thou beautiful god, in that far time,
    When in thy setting sweet thou gazest down
    On his grey head, wilt thou remember then
    That once I pleased thee, that I once was young?"

So did her voice cease, and on the earth fell sudden darkness. For to
Apollo had come the shame of love rejected, and there were those who
said that to the earth that night there came no sunset, only the
sullen darkness that told of the flight of an angry god. Yet, later,
the silver moonbeams of Diana seemed to greet the dark earth with a
smile, and, in the winged car of Neptune, Idas and Marpessa sped on,
greater than the gods, in a perfect harmony of human love that feared
nor time, nor pain, nor Death himself.




ARETHUSA


"We have victualled and watered," wrote Nelson from Syracuse in 1798,
"and surely, watering at the fountain of Arethusa, we must have
victory. We shall sail with the first breeze; and be assured I will
return either crowned with laurel or covered with cypress." Three days
later, he won the Battle of the Nile, one of the greatest sea-fights
of history.

Here in our own land the tales of the Greek gods seem very remote.
Like the colours in an old, old portrait, the humanity of the stories
seems to have faded. But in Sicily they grow vivid at once. Almost, as
we stand above Syracuse, that long yellow town by the sea--a
blue-green sea, with deep purple shadows where the clouds above it
grow dark, and little white-sailed boats, like white butterflies, wing
their way across to the far horizon--can we

    "Have glimpse of Proteus rising from the sea,
    Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn."

Here, to this day, one of the myths most impossible of acceptance to
the scientific modern mind lives on, and Arethusa is not yet forgotten.
"In Ortygia," says Cicero, "is a fountain of sweet water, the name of
which is Arethusa, of incredible flow, very full of fish, which would
be entirely overwhelmed by the sea, were its waters not protected from
the waves by a rampart and a wall of stone." White marble walls have
taken the place of the protecting barrier, but the spring bubbles up to
this day, and Ortygia (Quail Island) is the name still given to that
part of Syracuse. Fluffy-headed, long, green stalks of papyrus grow in
the fountain, and red and golden fish dart through its clear water.
Beyond lie the low shores of Plemmgrium, the fens of Lysimeleia, the
hills above the Anapus, and above all towers Etna, in snowy and
magnificent serenity and indifference to the changes wrought by the
centuries to gods and to men. Yet here the present is completely
overshadowed by the past, and even the story of Arethusa knocks loudly
at the well-barricaded doors of twentieth-century incredulity.

The beautiful Arethusa was a nymph in Diana's train, and many a time
in the chase did she thread her way through the dim woodland, as a
stream flows down through the forest from the mountains to the sea.
But to her, at last, there came a day when she was no longer the
huntress but the hunted.

The flaming wheels of the chariot of Apollo had made the whole land
scintillate with heat, and the nymph sought the kind shelter of a wood
where she might bathe in the exquisite coolness of the river that
still was chilled by the snows of the mountain. On the branch of a
tree that bent over the stream she hung her garments, and joyously
stepped into the limpid water. A ray of the sun glanced through the
leaves above her and made the soft sand in the river's bed gleam like
gold and the beautiful limbs of the nymph seem as though carved from
pure white marble by the hand of Pygmalion himself. There was no sound
there but the gentle sound of the stream that murmured caressingly to
her as it slowly moved on through the solitude, and so gently it
flowed that almost it seemed to stand still, as though regretful to
leave for the unknown forest so beautiful a thing as Arethusa.

    "The Earth seemed to love her
    And Heaven smiled above her."

But suddenly the stillness of the stream was ruffled. Waves, like the
newly-born brothers of the billows of the sea, swept both down-stream
and up-stream upon her, and the river no longer murmured gently, but
spoke to her in a voice that thrilled with passionate longing.
Alpheus, god of the river, had beheld her, and, beholding her, had
loved her once and forever. An uncouth creature of the forest was he,
unversed in all the arts of love-making. So not as a supplicant did he
come to her, but as one who demanded fiercely love for love. Terror
came upon Arethusa as she listened, and hastily she sprang from the
water that had brought fear upon her, and hastened to find shelter in
the woodlands. Then the murmur, as of the murmur of a river before a
mighty flood comes to seize it and hold it for its own, took form in a
voice that pled with her, in tones that made her tremble as she heard.

"Hear me, Arethusa!" it said. "I am Alpheus, god of the river that now
thou hast made sacred. I am the god of the rushing streams--the god of
the thundering cataracts. Where the mountain streams crash over the
rocks and echo through the shadowy hollows of the hills, I hold my
kingship. Down from Etna I come, and the fire of Etna is in my veins.
I love thee! I love but thee, and thou shalt be mine, and I thine
forever."

Then Arethusa, in blind panic, fled before the god who loved her.
Through the shadowy forest she sped, while he swiftly gained upon her.
The asphodel bent under her flying feet, and the golden flowers of the
_Fiori Maggio_ were swept aside as she fled. Yet ever Alpheus gained
upon her, until at length she felt that the chase was ended, and cried
to Diana to save her. Then a cloud, grey and thick and blinding as the
mist that wraps the mountain tops, suddenly descended and enfolded
her, and Alpheus groped for her in vain.

"Arethusa!" she heard him cry, in a voice of piteous
longing--"Arethusa!--my belovèd!"

Patiently he waited, with the love that makes uncouth things
beautiful, until at length a little breath from Zephyrus blew aside
the soft grey veil that hid his beloved from his sight, and he saw
that the nymph had been transformed into a fountain. Not for a moment
did Alpheus delay, but, turning himself into a torrent in flood, he
rushed on in pursuit of Arethusa. Then did Diana, to save her votary,
cleave a way for her through the dark earth even into the gloomy realm
of Pluto himself, and the nymph rushed onward, onward still, and then
upward, until at length she emerged again to the freedom of the blue
sky and green trees, and beheld the golden orange groves and the grey
olives, the burning red geranium flowers and the great snow-capped
mountain of Sicily.

But Alpheus had a love for her that cast out all fear. Through the
terrible blackness of the Cocytus valley he followed Arethusa, and
found a means of bursting through the encumbering earth and joining
her again. And in a spring that rises out of the sea near the shore he
was able at last to mingle his waters with those of the one for whom
he had lost his godship.

      "And now from their fountains
      In Enna's mountains,
    Down one vale where the morning basks,
      Like friends once parted
      Grown single-hearted,
    They ply their watery tasks,
      At sunrise they leap
      From their cradles steep
    In the cave of the shelving hill;
      At noontide they flow
      Through the woods below
    And the meadows of asphodel;
      And at night they sleep
      In the rocking deep
    Beneath the Ortygian shore;
      Like spirits that lie
      In the azure sky
    When they love but live no more."

        Shelley.




PERSEUS THE HERO

    "We call such a man a hero in English to this day, and
    call it a 'heroic' thing to suffer pain and grief, that
    we may do good to our fellow-men."

        Charles Kingsley.


In the pleasant land of Argos, now a place of unwholesome marshes,
once upon a time there reigned a king called Acrisius, the father of
one fair daughter. Danaë was her name, and she was very dear to the
king until a day when he longed to know what lay hid for him in the
lap of the gods, and consulted an oracle. With hanging head he
returned from the temple, for the oracle had told him that when his
daughter Danaë had borne a son, by the hand of that son death must
surely come upon him. And because the fear of death was in him more
strong than the love of his daughter, Acrisius resolved that by
sacrificing her he would baffle the gods and frustrate Death itself. A
great tower of brass was speedily built at his command, and in this
prison Danaë was placed, to drag out her weary days.

But who can escape the designs of the gods? From Olympus great Zeus
himself looked down and saw the air princess sighing away her youth.
And, full of pity and of love, he himself entered the brazen tower in
a golden shower, and Danaë became the bride of Zeus and happily passed
with him the time of her imprisonment.

To her at length was born a son, a beautiful and kingly child, and
great was the wrath of her father when he had tidings of the birth.
Did the gods in the high heavens laugh at him? The laugh should yet be
on his side. Down to the seashore he hurried Danaë and her newly-born
babe, the little Perseus, put them in a great chest, and set them
adrift to be a plaything for winds and waves and a prey for the cruel
and hungry sea.

    "When in the cunningly-wrought chest the raging blast
    and the stirred billow and terror fell upon her, with
    tearful cheeks she cast her arm around Perseus and
    spake, 'Alas, my child, what sorrow is mine! But thou
    slumberest, in baby-wise sleeping in this woeful ark;
    midst the darkness of the brazen rivet thou shinest and
    in the swart gloom sent forth; thou heedest not the deep
    foam of the passing wave above thy locks nor the voice
    of the blast as thou liest in thy purple covering, a
    sweet face. If terror had terrors for thee, and thou
    wert giving ear to my gentle words--I bid thee sleep, my
    babe, and may the sea sleep and our measureless woe; and
    may change of fortune come forth, Father Zeus, from
    thee. For that I make my prayer in boldness and beyond
    right, forgive me.'"

        Simonides of Keos.

For days and nights the mother and child were tossed on the billows,
but yet no harm came near them, and one morning the chest grounded on
the rocky beach of Seriphos, an island in the Ægean Sea. Here a
fisherman came on this strange flotsam and jetsam of the waves and
took the mother and child to Polydectes, the king, and the years that
followed were peaceful years for Danaë and for Perseus. But as Perseus
grew up, growing each day more goodly to look upon, more fearless,
more ready to gaze with serene courage into the eyes of gods and of
men, an evil thing befell his mother. She was but a girl when he was
born, and as the years passed she grew ever more fair. And the crafty
eyes of old Polydectes, the king, ever watched her more eagerly,
always more hotly desired her for his wife. But Danaë, the beloved of
Zeus himself, had no wish to wed the old king of the Cyclades, and
proudly she scorned his suit. Behind her, as she knew well, was the
stout arm of her son Perseus, and while Perseus was there, the king
could do her no harm. But Perseus, unwitting of the danger his mother
daily had to face, sailed the seas unfearingly, and felt that peace
and safety surrounded him on every side. At Samos one day, while his
ship was lading, Perseus lay down under the shade of a great tree, and
soon his eyelids grew heavy with sleep, and there came to him, like
butterflies that flit over the flowers in a sunlit garden, pleasant,
light-winged dreams. But yet another dream followed close on the merry
heels of those that went before. And before Perseus there stood one
whose grey eyes were as the fathomless sea on the dawn of a summer
day. Her long robes were blue as the hyacinths in spring, and the
spear that she held in her hand was of a polished brightness, as the
dart with which the gods smite the heart of a man, with joy
inexpressible, with sorrow that is scarcely to be borne. To Perseus
she spoke winged words.

"I am Pallas Athené," she said, "and to me the souls of men are known.
Those whose fat hearts are as those of the beasts that perish do I
know. They live at ease. No bitter sorrow is theirs, nor any fierce
joy that lifts their feet free from the cumbering clay. But dear to my
heart are the souls of those whose tears are tears of blood, whose joy
is as the joy of the Immortals. Pain is theirs, and sorrow.
Disappointment is theirs, and grief. Yet their love is as the love of
those who dwell on Olympus. Patient they are and long-suffering, and
ever they hope, ever do they trust. Ever they fight, fearless and
unashamed, and when the sum of their days on earth is accomplished,
wings, of whose existence they have never had knowledge, bear them
upwards, out of the mist and din and strife of life, to the life that
has no ending."

Then she laid her hand on the hand of Perseus. "Perseus," she said,
"art thou of those whose dull souls forever dwell in pleasant ease, or
wouldst thou be as one of the Immortals?"

And in his dream Perseus answered without hesitation:

"Rather let me die, a youth, living my life to the full, fighting
ever, suffering ever," he said, "than live at ease like a beast that
feeds on flowery pastures and knows no fiery gladness, no
heart-bleeding pain."

Then Pallas Athené, laughing for joy, because she loved so well a
hero's soul, showed him a picture that made even his brave heart sick
for dread, and told him a terrible story.

In the dim, cold, far west, she said, there lived three sisters. One
of them, Medusa, had been one of her priestesses, golden-haired and
most beautiful, but when Athené found that she was as wicked as she
was lovely, swiftly had she meted out a punishment. Every lock of her
golden hair had been changed into a venomous snake. Her eyes, that had
once been the cradles of love, were turned into love's stony tombs.
Her rosy cheeks were now of Death's own livid hue. Her smile, which
drew the hearts of lovers from their bosoms, had become a hideous
thing. A grinning mask looked on the world, and to the world her
gaping mouth and protruding tongue meant a horror before which the
world stood terrified, dumb. There are some sadnesses too terrible for
human hearts to bear, so it came to pass that in the dark cavern in
which she dwelt, and in the shadowy woods around it, all living things
that had met the awful gaze of her hopeless eyes were turned into
stone. Then Pallas Athené showed Perseus, mirrored in a brazen shield,
the face of one of the tragic things of the world. And as Perseus
looked, his soul grew chill within him. But when Athené, in low voice,
asked him:

"Perseus, wilt even end the sorrow of this piteous sinful one?" he
answered, "Even that will I do--the gods helping me."

And Pallas Athené, smiling again in glad content, left him to dream,
and Perseus awoke, in sudden fear, and found that in truth he had but
dreamed, yet held his dream as a holy thing in the secret
treasure-house of his heart.

Back to Seriphos he sailed, and found that his mother walked in fear
of Polydectes the king. She told her son--a strong man now, though
young in years--the story of his cruel persecution. Perseus saw red
blood, and gladly would he have driven his keen blade far home in the
heart of Polydectes. But his vengeance was to be a great vengeance,
and the vengeance was delayed.

The king gave a feast, and on that day every one in the land brought
offerings of their best and most costly to do him honour. Perseus
alone came empty-handed, and as he stood in the king's court as though
he were a beggar, the other youths mocked at him of whom they had ever
been jealous.

"Thou sayest that thy father is one of the gods!" they said. "Where is
thy godlike gift, O Perseus!"

And Polydectes, glad to humble the lad who was keeper of his mother's
honour, echoed their foolish taunt.

"Where is the gift of the gods that the noble son of the gods has
brought me?" he asked, and his fat cheeks and loose mouth quivered
with ugly merriment.

Then Perseus, his head thrown back, gazed in the bold eyes of
Polydectes.

Son of Zeus he was indeed, as he looked with royal scorn at those whom
he despised.

"A godlike gift thou shalt have, in truth, O king," he said, and his
voice rang out as a trumpet-call before the battle. "The gift of the
gods shall be thine. The gods helping me, thou shalt have the head of
Medusa."

A laugh, half-born, died in the throats of Polydectes and of those who
listened, and Perseus strode out of the palace, a glow in his heart,
for he knew that Pallas Athené had lit the fire that burned in him
now, and that though he should shed the last drop of his life's blood
to win what he sought, right would triumph, and wrong must be worsted.

Still quivering with anger, Perseus went down to the blue sea that
gently whispered its secrets to the shore on which he stood.

"If Pallas Athené would but come," he thought--"if only my dreams
might come true."

For, like many a boy before and since, Perseus had dreamed of gallant,
fearless deeds. Like many a boy before and since, he had been the hero
of a great adventure.

So he prayed, "Come to me! I pray you, Pallas Athené, come! and let me
dream true."

His prayer was answered.

Into the sky there came a little silver cloud that grew and grew, and
ever it grew nearer, and then, as in his dream, Pallas Athené came to
him and smiled on him as the sun smiles on the water in spring. Nor
was she alone. Beside her stood Hermes of the winged shoes, and
Perseus knelt before the two in worship. Then, very gently, Pallas
Athené gave him counsel, and more than counsel she gave.

In his hand she placed a polished shield, than which no mirror shone
more brightly.

"Do not look at Medusa herself; look only on her image here
reflected--then strike home hard and swiftly. And when her head is
severed, wrap it in the goatskin on which the shield hangs. So wilt
thou return in safety and in honour."

"But how, then, shall I cross the wet grey fields of this watery
way?" asked Perseus. "Would that I were a white-winged bird that skims
across the waves."

And, with the smile of a loving comrade, Hermes laid his hand on the
shoulder of Perseus.

"My winged shoes shall be thine," he said, "and the white-winged
sea-birds shalt thou leave far, far behind."

"Yet another gift is thine," said Athené. "Gird on, as gift from the
gods, this sword that is immortal."

For a moment Perseus lingered. "May I not bid farewell to my mother?"
he asked. "May I not offer burnt-offerings to thee and to Hermes, and
to my father Zeus himself?"

But Athené said Nay, at his mother's weeping his heart might relent,
and the offering that the Olympians desired was the head of Medusa.

Then, like a fearless young golden eagle, Perseus spread out his arms,
and the winged shoes carried him across the seas to the cold northern
lands whither Athené had directed him.

Each day his shoes took him a seven days' journey, and ever the air
through which he passed grew more chill, till at length he reached the
land of everlasting snow, where the black ice never knows the
conquering warmth of spring, and where the white surf of the moaning
waves freezes solid even as it touches the shore.

It was a dark grim place to which he came, and in a gloomy cavern by
the sea lived the Graeæ, the three grey sisters that Athené had told
him he must seek. Old and grey and horrible they were, with but one
tooth amongst them, and but one eye. From hand to hand they passed
the eye, and muttered and shivered in the blackness and the cold.

[Illustration: THEY WHIMPERED AND BEGGED OF HIM]

Boldly Perseus spoke to them and asked them to guide him to the place
where Medusa and her sisters the Gorgons dwelt.

"No others know where they dwell," he said. "Tell me, I pray thee, the
way that I may find them."

But the Grey Women were kin to the Gorgons, and hated all the children
of men, and ugly was their evil mirth as they mocked at Perseus and
refused to tell him where Medusa might be found.

But Perseus grew wily in his desire not to fail, and as the eye passed
from one withered, clutching hand to another, he held out his own
strong young palm, and in her blindness one of the three placed the
eye within it.

Then the Grey Women gave a piteous cry, fierce and angry as the cry of
old grey wolves that have been robbed of their prey, and gnashed upon
him with their toothless jaws.

And Perseus said: "Wicked ye are and cruel at heart, and blind shall
ye remain forever unless ye tell me where I may find the Gorgons. But
tell me that, and I give back the eye."

Then they whimpered and begged of him, and when they found that all
their beseeching was in vain, at length they told him.

"Go south," they said, "so far south that at length thou comest to the
uttermost limits of the sea, to the place where the day and night
meet. There is the Garden of the Hesperides, and of them must thou
ask the way." And "Give us back our eye!" they wailed again most
piteously, and Perseus gave back the eye into a greedy trembling old
hand, and flew south like a swallow that is glad to leave the gloomy
frozen lands behind.

To the garden of the Hesperides he came at last, and amongst the
myrtles and roses and sunny fountains he came on the nymphs who there
guard the golden fruit, and begged them to tell him whither he must
wing his way in order to find the Gorgons. But the nymphs could not
tell.

"We must ask Atlas," they said, "the giant who sits high up on the
mountain and with his strong shoulders keeps the heavens and earth
apart."

And with the nymphs Perseus went up the mountain and asked the patient
giant to guide him to the place of his quest.

"Far away I can see them," said Atlas, "on an island in the great
ocean. But unless thou wert to wear the helmet of Pluto himself, thy
going must be in vain."

"What is this helmet?" asked Perseus, "and how can I gain it?"

"Didst thou wear the helmet of the ruler of Dark Places, thou wouldst
be as invisible as a shadow in the blackness of night," answered
Atlas; "but no mortal can obtain it, for only the Immortals can brave
the terrors of the Shadowy Land and yet return; yet if thou wilt
promise me one thing, the helmet shall be thine."

"What wouldst thou?" asked Perseus.

And Atlas said, "For many a long year have I borne this earth, and I
grow aweary of my burden. When thou hast slain Medusa, let me gaze
upon her face, that I may be turned into stone and suffer no more
forever."

And Perseus promised, and at the bidding of Atlas one of the nymphs
sped down to the land of the Shades, and for seven days Perseus and
her sisters awaited her return. Her face was as the face of a white
lily and her eyes were dark with sadness when she came, but with her
she bore the helmet of Pluto, and when she and her sisters had kissed
Perseus and bidden him a sorrowful farewell, he put on the helmet and
vanished away.

Soon the gentle light of day had gone, and he found himself in a place
where clammy fog blotted out all things, and where the sea was black
as the water of that stream that runs through the Cocytus valley. And
in that silent land where there is "neither night nor day, nor cloud
nor breeze nor storm," he found the cave of horrors in which the
Gorgons dwelt.

Two of them, like monstrous swine, lay asleep,

    "But a third woman paced about the hall,
    And ever turned her head from wall to wall,
    And moaned aloud and shrieked in her despair,
    Because the golden tresses of her hair
    Were moved by writhing snakes from side to side,
    That in their writhing oftentimes would glide
    On to her breast or shuddering shoulders white;
    Or, falling down, the hideous things would light
    Upon her feet, and, crawling thence, would twine
    Their slimy folds upon her ankles fine."

        William Morris.

In the shield of Pallas Athené the picture was mirrored, and as
Perseus gazed on it his soul grew heavy for the beauty and the horror
of Medusa. And "Oh that it had been her foul sisters that I must
slay!" he thought at first, but then--"To slay her will be kind
indeed," he said. "Her beauty has become corruption, and all the joy
of life for her has passed into the agony of remembrance, the torture
of unending remorse."

And when he saw her brazen claws that still were greedy and lustful to
strike and to slay, his face grew stern, and he paused no longer, but
with his sword he smote her neck with all his might and main. And to
the rocky floor the body of Medusa fell with brazen clang, but her
head he wrapped in the goatskin, while he turned his eyes away. Aloft
then he sprang, and flew swifter than an arrow from the bow of Diana.

With hideous outcry the two other Gorgons found the body of Medusa,
and, like foul vultures that hunt a little song-bird, they flew in
pursuit of Perseus. For many a league they kept up the chase, and
their howling was grim to hear. Across the seas they flew, and over
the yellow sand of the Libyan desert, and as Perseus flew before them,
some blood-drops fell from the severed head of Medusa, and from them
bred the vipers that are found in the desert to this day. But bravely
did the winged shoes of Hermes bear Perseus on, and by nightfall the
Gorgon sisters had passed from sight, and Perseus found himself once
more in the garden of the Hesperides. Ere he sought the nymphs, he
knelt by the sea to cleanse from his hands Medusa's blood, and still
does the seaweed that we find on sea-beaches after a storm bear the
crimson stains.

And when Perseus had received glad welcome from the fair dwellers in
the garden of the Hesperides, he sought Atlas, that to him he might
fulfil his promise; and eagerly Atlas beheld him, for he was aweary of
his long toil.

So Perseus uncovered the face of Medusa and held it up for the Titan
to gaze upon.

And when Atlas looked upon her whose beauty had once been pure and
living as that of a flower in spring, and saw only anguish and
cruelty, foul wickedness, and hideous despair, his heart grew like
stone within him. To stone, too, turned his great, patient face, and
into stone grew his vast limbs and strong, crouching back. So did
Atlas the Titan become Atlas the Mountain, and still his head,
white-crowned with snow, and his great shoulder far up in misty
clouds, would seem to hold apart the earth and the sky.

Then Perseus again took flight, and in his flight he passed over many
lands and suffered weariness and want, and sometimes felt his faith
growing low. Yet ever he sped on, hoping ever, enduring ever. In Egypt
he had rest and was fed and honoured by the people of the land, who
were fain to keep him to be one of their gods. And in a place called
Chemmis they built a statue of him when he had gone, and for many
hundreds of years it stood there. And the Egyptians said that ever and
again Perseus returned, and that when he came the Nile rose high and
the season was fruitful because he had blessed their land.

Far down below him as he flew one day he saw something white on a
purple rock in the sea. It seemed too large to be a snowy-plumaged
bird, and he darted swiftly downward that he might see more clearly.
The spray lashed against the steep rocks of the desolate island, and
showered itself upon a figure that at first he took to be a statue of
white marble. The figure was but that of a girl, slight and very
youthful, yet more fair even than any of the nymphs of the Hesperides.
Invisible in his Helmet of Darkness, Perseus drew near, and saw that
the fragile white figure was shaken by shivering sobs. The waves,
every few moments, lapped up on her little cold white feet, and he saw
that heavy chains held her imprisoned to that chilly rock in the sea.
A great anger stirred the heart of Perseus, and swiftly he took the
helmet from his head and stood beside her. The maid gave a cry of
terror, but there was no evil thing in the face of Perseus. Naught but
strength and kindness and purity shone out of his steady eyes.

Thus when, very gently, he asked her what was the meaning of her cruel
imprisonment, she told him the piteous story, as a little child tells
the story of its grief to the mother who comforts it. Her mother was
queen of Ethiopia, she said, and very, very beautiful. But when the
queen had boasted that no nymph who played amongst the snow-crested
billows of the sea was as fair as she, a terrible punishment was sent
to her. All along the coast of her father's kingdom a loathsome
sea-monster came to hold its sway, and hideous were its ravages. Men
and women, children and animals, all were equally desirable food for
its insatiate maw, and the whole land of Ethiopia lay in mourning
because of it. At last her father, the king, had consulted an oracle
that he might find help to rid the land of the monster. And the oracle
had told him that only when his fair daughter, Andromeda, had been
sacrificed to the creature that scourged the sea-coast would the
country go free. Thus had she been brought there by her parents that
one life might be given for many, and that her mother's broken heart
might expiate her sin of vanity. Even as Andromeda spoke, the sea was
broken by the track of a creature that cleft the water as does the
forerunning gale of a mighty storm. And Andromeda gave a piteous cry.

"Lo! he comes!" she cried. "Save me! ah, save me! I am so young to
die."

Then Perseus darted high above her and for an instant hung poised like
a hawk that is about to strike. Then, like the hawk that cannot miss
its prey, swiftly did he swoop down and smote with his sword the
devouring monster of the ocean. Not once, but again and again he
smote, until all the water round the rock was churned into slime and
blood-stained froth, and until his loathsome combatant floated on its
back, mere carrion for the scavengers of the sea.

Then Perseus hewed off the chains that held Andromeda, and in his arms
he held her tenderly as he flew with her to her father's land.

Who so grateful then as the king and queen of Ethiopia? and who so
happy as Andromeda? for Perseus, her deliverer, dearest and greatest
hero to her in all the world, not only had given her her freedom, but
had given her his heart.

Willingly and joyfully her father agreed to give her to Perseus for
his wife. No marriage feast so splendid had ever been held in Ethiopia
in the memory of man, but as it went on, an angry man with a band of
sullen-faced followers strode into the banqueting-hall. It was
Phineus, he who had been betrothed to Andromeda, yet who had not dared
to strike a blow for her rescue. Straight at Perseus they rushed, and
fierce was the fight that then began. But of a sudden, from the
goatskin where it lay hid, Perseus drew forth the head of Medusa, and
Phineus and his warriors were turned into stone.

For seven days the marriage feast lasted, but on the eighth night
Pallas Athené came to Perseus in a dream.

"Nobly and well hast thou played the hero, O son of Zeus!" she said;
"but now that thy toil is near an end and thy sorrows have ended in
joy, I come to claim the shoes of Hermes, the helmet of Pluto, the
sword, and the shield that is mine own. Yet the head of the Gorgon
must thou yet guard awhile, for I would have it laid in my temple at
Seriphos that I may wear it on my shield for evermore."

As she ceased to speak, Perseus awoke, and lo, the shield and helmet
and the sword and winged shoes were gone, so that he knew that his
dream was no false vision.

Then did Perseus and Andromeda, in a red-prowed galley made by cunning
craftsmen from Phœnicia, sail away westward, until at length they
came to the blue water of the Ægean Sea, and saw rising out of the
waves before them the rocks of Seriphos. And when the rowers rested on
their long oars, and the red-prowed ship ground on the pebbles of the
beach, Perseus and his bride sought Danaë, the fair mother of Perseus.

Black grew the brow of the son of Danaë when she told him what cruel
things she had suffered in his absence from the hands of Polydectes
the king. Straight to the palace Perseus strode, and there found the
king and his friends at their revels. For seven years had Perseus been
away, and now it was no longer a stripling who stood in the palace
hall, but a man in stature and bearing like one of the gods.
Polydectes alone knew him, and from his wine he looked up with mocking
gaze.

"So thou hast returned? oh nameless son of a deathless god," he said.
"Thou didst boast, but methinks thy boast was an empty one!"

But even as he spoke, the jeering smile froze on his face, and the
faces of those who sat with him stiffened in horror.

"O king," Perseus said, "I swore that, the gods helping me, thou
shouldst have the head of Medusa. The gods have helped me. Behold the
Gorgon's head."

Wild horror in their eyes, Polydectes and his friends gazed on the
unspeakable thing, and as they gazed they turned into stone--a ring of
grey stones that still sit on a hillside of Seriphos.

With his wife and his mother, Perseus then sailed away, for he had a
great longing to take Danaë back to the land of her birth and to see
if her father, Acrisius, still lived and might not now repent of his
cruelty to her and to his grandson. But there he found that the sins
of Acrisius had been punished and that he had been driven from his
throne and his own land by a usurper. Not for long did the sword of
Perseus dwell in its scabbard, and speedily was the usurper cast
forth, and all the men of Argos acclaimed Perseus as their glorious
king. But Perseus would not be their king.

"I go to seek Acrisius," he said. "My mother's father is your king."

Again his galley sailed away, and at last, up the long Eubœan Sea
they came to the town of Larissa, where the old king now dwelt.

A feast and sports were going on when they got there, and beside the
king of the land sat Acrisius, an aged man, yet a kingly one indeed.

And Perseus thought, "If I, a stranger, take part in the sports and
carry away prizes from the men of Larissa, surely the heart of
Acrisius must soften towards me."

Thus did he take off his helmet and cuirass, and stood unclothed
beside the youths of Larissa, and so godlike was he that they all
said, amazed, "Surely this stranger comes from Olympus and is one of
the Immortals."

In his hand he took a discus, and full five fathoms beyond those of
the others he cast it, and a great shout arose from those who watched,
and Acrisius cried out as loudly as all the rest.

"Further still!" they cried. "Further still canst thou hurl! thou art
a hero indeed!"

And Perseus, putting forth all his strength, hurled once again, and
the discus flew from his hand like a bolt from the hand of Zeus. The
watchers held their breath and made ready for a shout of delight as
they saw it speed on, further than mortal man had ever hurled before.
But joy died in their hearts when a gust of wind caught the discus as
it sped and hurled it against Acrisius, the king. And with a sigh like
the sigh that passes through the leaves of a tree as the woodman fells
it and it crashes to the earth, so did Acrisius fall and lie prone. To
his side rushed Perseus, and lifted him tenderly in his arms. But the
spirit of Acrisius had fled. And with a great cry of sorrow Perseus
called to the people:

"Behold me! I am Perseus, grandson of the man I have slain! Who can
avoid the decree of the gods?"

For many a year thereafter Perseus reigned as king, and to him and to
his fair wife were born four sons and three daughters. Wisely and well
he reigned, and when, at a good old age, Death took him and the wife
of his heart, the gods, who had always held him dear, took him up
among the stars to live for ever and ever. And there still, on clear
and starry nights, we may see him holding the Gorgon's head. Near him
are the father and mother of Andromeda--Cepheus and Cassiopeia, and
close beside him stands Andromeda with her white arms spread out
across the blue sky as in the days when she stood chained to the rock.
And those who sail the watery ways look up for guidance to one whose
voyaging is done and whose warfare is accomplished, and take their
bearings from the constellation of Cassiopeia.




NIOBE

    "... Like Niobe, all tears."

        Shakespeare.


The quotation is an overworked quotation, like many another of those
from _Hamlet_; yet, have half of those whose lips utter it more than
the vaguest acquaintance with the story of Niobe and the cause of her
tears? The noble group--attributed to Praxiteles--of Niobe and her
last remaining child, in the Uffizi Palace at Florence, has been so
often reproduced that it also has helped to make the anguished figure
of the Theban queen a familiar one in pictorial tragedy, so that as
long as the works of those Titans of art, Shakespeare and Praxiteles,
endure, no other monument is wanted for the memory of Niobe.

Like many of the tales of mythology, her tragedy is a story of
vengeance wreaked upon a mortal by an angry god. She was the daughter
of Tantalus, and her husband was Amphion, King of Thebes, himself a
son of Zeus. To her were born seven fair daughters and seven beautiful
and gallant sons, and it was not because of her own beauty, nor her
husband's fame, nor their proud descent and the greatness of their
kingdom, that the Queen of Thebes was arrogant in her pride. Very sure
she was that no woman had ever borne children like her own children,
whose peers were not to be found on earth nor in heaven. Even in our
own day there are mortal mothers who feel as Niobe felt.

But amongst the Immortals there was also a mother with children whom
she counted as peerless. Latona, mother of Apollo and Diana, was
magnificently certain that in all time, nor in eternity to come, could
there be a son and daughter so perfect in beauty, in wisdom, and in
power as the two that were her own. Loudly did she proclaim her proud
belief, and when Niobe heard it she laughed in scorn.

"The goddess has a son and a daughter," she said. "Beautiful and wise
and powerful they may be, but I have borne seven daughters and seven
sons, and each son is more than the peer of Apollo, each daughter more
than the equal of Diana, the moon-goddess!"

And to her boastful words Latona gave ear, and anger began to grow in
her heart.

Each year the people of Thebes were wont to hold a great festival in
honour of Latona and her son and daughter, and it was an evil day for
Niobe when she came upon the adoring crowd that, laurel-crowned, bore
frankincense to lay before the altars of the gods whose glories they
had assembled together to celebrate.

"Oh foolish ones!" she said, and her voice was full of scorn, "am I
not greater than Latona? I am the daughter of a goddess, my husband,
the king, the son of a god. Am I not fair? am I not queenly as Latona
herself? And, of a surety, I am richer by far than the goddess who has
but one daughter and one son. Look on my seven noble sons! behold the
beauty of my seven daughters, and see if they in beauty and all else
do not equal the dwellers in Olympus!"

And when the people looked, and shouted aloud, for in truth Niobe and
her children were like unto gods, their queen said, "Do not waste thy
worship, my people. Rather make the prayers to thy king and to me and
to my children who buttress us round and make our strength so great,
that fearlessly we can despise the gods."

In her home on the Cynthian mountain top, Latona heard the arrogant
words of the queen of Thebes, and even as a gust of wind blows
smouldering ashes into a consuming fire, her growing anger flamed into
rage. She called Apollo and Diana to her, and commanded them to avenge
the blasphemous insult which had been given to them and to their
mother. And the twin gods listened with burning hearts.

"Truly shalt thou be avenged!" cried Apollo. "The shameless one shall
learn that not unscathed goes she who profanes the honour of the
mother of the deathless gods!"

And with their silver bows in their hands, Apollo, the smiter from
afar, and Diana, the virgin huntress, hasted to Thebes. There they
found all the noble youths of the kingdom pursuing their sports. Some
rode, some were having chariot-races, and excelling in all things were
the seven sons of Niobe.

Apollo lost no time. A shaft from his quiver flew, as flies a bolt
from the hand of Zeus, and the first-born of Niobe fell, like a young
pine broken by the wind, on the floor of his winning chariot. His
brother, who followed him, went on the heels of his comrade swiftly
down to the Shades. Two of the other sons of Niobe were wrestling
together, their great muscles moving under the skin of white satin
that covered their perfect bodies, and as they gripped each other, yet
another shaft was driven from the bow of Apollo, and both lads fell,
joined by one arrow, on the earth, and there breathed their lives
away.

Their elder brother ran to their aid, and to him, too, came death,
swift and sure. The two youngest, even as they cried for mercy to an
unknown god, were hurried after them by the unerring arrows of Apollo.
The cries of those who watched this terrible slaying were not long in
bringing Niobe to the place where her sons lay dead. Yet, even then,
her pride was unconquered, and she defied the gods, and Latona, to
whose jealousy she ascribed the fate of her "seven spears."

"Not yet hast thou conquered, Latona!" she cried. "My seven sons lie
dead, yet to me still remain the seven perfect lovelinesses that I
have borne. Try to match them, if thou canst, with the beauty of thy
two! Still am I richer than thou, O cruel and envious mother of one
daughter and one son!"

But even as she spoke, Diana had drawn her bow, and as the scythe of a
mower quickly cuts down, one after the other, the tall white blossoms
in the meadow, so did her arrows slay the daughters of Niobe. When one
only remained, the pride of Niobe was broken. With her arms round the
little slender frame of her golden-haired youngest born, she looked up
to heaven, and cried upon all the gods for mercy.

"She is so little!" she wailed. "So young--so dear! Ah, spare me
_one_," she said, "only one out of so many!"

But the gods laughed. Like a harsh note of music sounded the twang of
Diana's bow. Pierced by a silver arrow, the little girl lay dead. The
dignity of Latona was avenged.

Overwhelmed by despair, King Amphion killed himself, and Niobe was
left alone to gaze on the ruin around her. For nine days she sat, a
Greek Rachel, weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted,
because they were not. On the tenth day, the sight was too much even
for the superhuman hearts of the gods to endure. They turned the
bodies into stone and themselves buried them. And when they looked on
the face of Niobe and saw on it a bleeding anguish that no human hand
could stay nor the word of any god comfort, the gods were merciful.
Her grief was immortalised, for Niobe, at their will, became a stone,
and was carried by a wailing tempest to the summit of Mount Sipylus,
in Lydia, where a spring of Argos bore her name. Yet although a rock
was Niobe, from her blind eyes of stone the tears still flowed, a
clear stream of running water, symbol of a mother's anguish and
never-ending grief.




HYACINTHUS

                ... "The sad death
    Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
    Of Zephyr slew him--Zephyr penitent
    Who now, ere Phœbus mounts the firmament,
    Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain."

        Keats.


"Whom the gods love die young"--truly it would seem so, as we read the
old tales of men and of women beloved of the gods. To those men who
were deemed worthy of being companions of the gods, seemingly no good
fortune came. Yet, after all, if even in a brief span of life they had
tasted god-given happiness, was their fate one to be pitied? Rather
let us keep our tears for those who, in a colourless grey world, have
seen the dull days go past laden with trifling duties, unnecessary
cares and ever-narrowing ideals, and have reached old age and the
grave--no narrower than their lives--without ever having known a
fulness of happiness, such as the Olympians knew, or ever having dared
to reach upwards and to hold fellowship with the Immortals.

Hyacinthus was a Spartan youth, son of Clio, one of the Muses, and of
the mortal with whom she had mated, and from mother, or father, or
from the gods themselves, he had received the gift of beauty. It
chanced one day that as Apollo drove his chariot on its
all-conquering round, he saw the boy. Hyacinthus was as fair to look
upon as the fairest of women, yet he was not only full of grace, but
was muscular, and strong as a straight young pine on Mount Olympus
that fears not the blind rage of the North Wind nor the angry tempests
of the South.

When Apollo had spoken with him he found that the face of Hyacinthus
did not belie the heart within him, and gladly the god felt that at
last he had found the perfect companion, the ever courageous and
joyous young mate, whose mood was always ready to meet his own. Did
Apollo desire to hunt, with merry shout Hyacinthus called the hounds.
Did the great god deign to fish, Hyacinthus was ready to fetch the
nets and to throw himself, whole-souled, into the great affair of
chasing and of landing the silvery fishes. When Apollo wished to climb
the mountains, to heights so lonely that not even the moving of an
eagle's wing broke the everlasting stillness, Hyacinthus--his strong
limbs too perfect for the chisel of any sculptor worthily to
reproduce--was ready and eager for the climb. And when, on the
mountain top, Apollo gazed in silence over illimitable space, and
watched the silver car of his sister Diana rising slowly into the deep
blue of the sky, silvering land and water as she passed, it was never
Hyacinthus who was the first to speak--with words to break the spell
of Nature's perfect beauty, shared in perfect companionship. There
were times, too, when Apollo would play his lyre, and when naught but
the music of his own making could fulfil his longing. And when those
times came, Hyacinthus would lie at the feet of his friend--of the
friend who was a god--and would listen, with eyes of rapturous joy, to
the music that his master made. A very perfect friend was this friend
of the sun-god.

Nor was it Apollo alone who desired the friendship of Hyacinthus.
Zephyrus, god of the South Wind, had known him before Apollo crossed
his path and had eagerly desired him for a friend. But who could stand
against Apollo? Sulkily Zephyrus marked their ever-ripening
friendship, and in his heart jealousy grew into hatred, and hatred
whispered to him of revenge. Hyacinthus excelled at all sports, and
when he played quoits it was sheer joy for Apollo, who loved all
things beautiful, to watch him as he stood to throw the disc, his taut
muscles making him look like Hermes, ready to spurn the cumbering
earth from off his feet. Further even than the god, his friend, could
Hyacinthus throw, and always his merry laugh when he succeeded made
the god feel that nor man nor god could ever grow old. And so there
came that day, fore-ordained by the Fates, when Apollo and Hyacinthus
played a match together. Hyacinthus made a valiant throw, and Apollo
took his place, and cast the discus high and far. Hyacinthus ran
forward eager to measure the distance, shouting with excitement over a
throw that had indeed been worthy of a god. Thus did Zephyrus gain his
opportunity. Swiftly through the tree-tops ran the murmuring South
Wind, and smote the discus of Apollo with a cruel hand. Against the
forehead of Hyacinthus it dashed, smiting the locks that lay upon it,
crashing through skin and flesh and bone, felling him to the earth.
Apollo ran towards him and raised him in his arms. But the head of
Hyacinthus fell over on the god's shoulder, like the head of a lily
whose stem is broken. The red blood gushed to the ground, an
unquenchable stream, and darkness fell on the eyes of Hyacinthus, and,
with the flow of his life's blood, his gallant young soul passed away.

"Would that I could die for thee, Hyacinthus!" cried the god, his
god's heart near breaking. "I have robbed thee of thy youth. Thine is
the suffering, mine the crime. I shall sing thee ever--oh perfect
friend! And evermore shalt thou live as a flower that will speak to
the hearts of men of spring, of everlasting youth--of life that lives
forever."

As he spoke, there sprang from the blood-drops at his feet a cluster
of flowers, blue as the sky in spring, yet hanging their heads as if
in sorrow.[4]

[Illustration: DARKNESS FELL ON THE EYES OF HYACINTHUS]

And still, when winter is ended, and the song of birds tell us of the
promise of spring, if we go to the woods, we find traces of the vow of
the sun-god. The trees are budding in buds of rosy hue, the willow
branches are decked with silvery catkins powdered with gold. The
larches, like slender dryads, wear a feathery garb of tender green,
and under the trees of the woods the primroses look up, like fallen
stars. Along the woodland path we go, treading on fragrant
pine-needles and on the beech leaves of last year that have not yet
lost their radiant amber. And, at a turn of the way, the sun-god
suddenly shines through the great dark branches of the giants of the
forest, and before us lies a patch of exquisite blue, as though a god
had robbed the sky and torn from it a precious fragment that seems
alive and moving, between the sun and the shadow.

And, as we look, the sun caresses it, and the South Wind gently moves
the little bell-shaped flowers of the wild hyacinth as it softly
sweeps across them. So does Hyacinthus live on; so do Apollo and
Zephyrus still love and mourn their friend.


FOOTNOTE:

[4] Legend says that on the petals of the hyacinth Apollo transcribed
the letters "Aì,"--"Alas!"




KING MIDAS OF THE GOLDEN TOUCH


In the plays of Shakespeare we have three distinct divisions--three
separate volumes. One deals with Tragedy, another with Comedy, a third
with History; and a mistake made by the young in their aspect of life
is that they do the same thing, and keep tragedy and comedy severely
apart, relegating them to separate volumes that, so they think, have
nothing to do with each other. But those who have passed many
milestones on the road know that "_History_" is the only right label
for the Book of Life's many parts, and that the actors in the great
play are in truth tragic comedians.

This is the story of Midas, one of the chief tragic comedians of
mythology.

Once upon a time the kingdom of Phrygia lacked a king, and in much
perplexity, the people sought help from an oracle. The answer was very
definite:

"The first man who enters your city riding in a car shall be your
king."

That day there came slowly jogging into the city in their heavy,
wooden-wheeled wain, the peasant Gordias and his wife and son, whose
destination was the marketplace, and whose business was to sell the
produce of their little farm and vineyard--fowls, a goat or two, and
a couple of skinsful of strong, purple-red wine. An eager crowd
awaited their entry, and a loud shout of welcome greeted them. And
their eyes grew round and their mouths fell open in amaze when they
were hailed as King and Queen and Prince of Phrygia.

The gods had indeed bestowed upon Gordias, the low-born peasant, a
surprising gift, but he showed his gratitude by dedicating his wagon
to the deity of the oracle and tying it up in its place with the
wiliest knot that his simple wisdom knew, pulled as tight as his
brawny arms and strong rough hands could pull. Nor could anyone untie
the famous Gordian knot, and therefore become, as the oracle promised,
lord of all Asia, until centuries had passed, and Alexander the Great
came to Phrygia and sliced through the knot with his all-conquering
sword.

In time Midas, the son of Gordias, came to inherit the throne and
crown of Phrygia. Like many another not born and bred to the purple,
his honours sat heavily upon him. From the day that his father's wain
had entered the city amidst the acclamations of the people, he had
learned the value of power, and therefore, from his boyhood onward,
power, always more power, was what he coveted. Also his peasant father
had taught him that gold could buy power, and so Midas ever longed for
more gold, that could buy him a place in the world that no descendant
of a long race of kings should be able to contest. And from Olympus
the gods looked down and smiled, and vowed that Midas should have the
chance of realising his heart's desire.

Therefore one day when he and his court were sitting in the solemn
state that Midas required, there rode into their midst, tipsily
swaying on the back of a gentle full-fed old grey ass, ivy-crowned,
jovial and foolish, the satyr Silenus, guardian of the young god
Bacchus.

With all the deference due to the friend of a god Midas treated this
disreputable old pedagogue, and for ten days and nights on end he
feasted him royally. On the eleventh day Bacchus came in search of his
preceptor, and in deep gratitude bade Midas demand of him what he
would, because he had done Silenus honour when to dishonour him lay in
his power.

Not even for a moment did Midas ponder.

"I would have gold," he said hastily--"much gold. I would have that
touch by which all common and valueless things become golden
treasures."

And Bacchus, knowing that here spoke the son of peasants who many
times had gone empty to bed after a day of toilful striving on the
rocky uplands of Phrygia, looked a little sadly in the eager face of
Midas, and answered: "Be it as thou wilt. Thine shall be the golden
touch."

Then Bacchus and Silenus went away, a rout of singing revellers at
their heels, and Midas quickly put to proof the words of Bacchus.

An olive tree grew near where he stood, and from it he picked a little
twig decked with leaves of softest grey, and lo, it grew heavy as he
held it, and glittered like a piece of his crown. He stooped to touch
the green turf on which some fragrant violets grew, and turf grew into
cloth of gold, and violets lost their fragrance and became hard,
solid, golden things. He touched an apple whose cheek grew rosy in the
sun, and at once it became like the golden fruit in the Garden of the
Hesperides. The stone pillars of his palace as he brushed past them on
entering, blazed like a sunset sky. The gods had not deceived him.
Midas had the Golden Touch. Joyously he strode into the palace and
commanded a feast to be prepared--a feast worthy of an occasion so
magnificent.

But when Midas, with the healthy appetite of the peasant-born, would
have eaten largely of the savoury food that his cooks prepared, he
found that his teeth only touched roast kid to turn it into a slab of
gold, that garlic lost its flavour and became gritty as he chewed,
that rice turned into golden grains, and curdled milk became a dower
fit for a princess, entirely unnegotiable for the digestion of man.
Baffled and miserable, Midas seized his cup of wine, but the red wine
had become one with the golden vessel that held it; nor could he
quench his thirst, for even the limpid water from the fountain was
melted gold when it touched his dry lips. Only for a very few days was
Midas able to bear the affliction of his wealth. There was nothing now
for him to live for. He could buy the whole earth if he pleased, but
even children shrank in terror from his touch, and hungry and thirsty
and sick at heart he wearily dragged along his weighty robes of gold.
Gold was power, he knew well, yet of what worth was gold while he
starved? Gold could not buy him life and health and happiness.

In despair, at length he cried to the god who had given him the gift
that he hated.

"Save me, O Bacchus!" he said. "A witless one am I, and the folly of
my desire has been my undoing. Take away from me the accursed Golden
Touch, and faithfully and well shall I serve thee forever."

Then Bacchus, very pitiful for him, told Midas to go to Sardis, the
chief city of his worshippers, and to trace to its source the river
upon which it was built. And in that pool, when he found it, he was to
plunge his head, and so he would, for evermore, be freed from the
Golden Touch.

It was a long journey that Midas then took, and a weary and a starving
man was he when at length he reached the spring where the river
Pactolus had its source. He crawled forward, and timidly plunged in
his head and shoulders. Almost he expected to feel the harsh grit of
golden water, but instead there was the joy he had known as a peasant
boy when he laved his face and drank at a cool spring when his day's
toil was ended. And when he raised his face from the pool, he knew
that his hateful power had passed from him, but under the water he saw
grains of gold glittering in the sand, and from that time forth the
river Pactolus was noted for its gold.

One lesson the peasant king had learnt by paying in suffering for a
mistake, but there was yet more suffering in store for the tragic
comedian.

He had now no wish for golden riches, nor even for power. He wished to
lead the simple life and to listen to the pipings of Pan along with
the goat-herds on the mountains or the wild creatures in the woods.
Thus it befell that he was present one day at a contest between Pan
and Apollo himself. It was a day of merry-making for nymphs and fauns
and dryads, and all those who lived in the lonely solitudes of Phrygia
came to listen to the music of the god who ruled them. For as Pan sat
in the shade of a forest one night and piped on his reeds until the
very shadows danced, and the water of the stream by which he sat leapt
high over the mossy stones it passed, and laughed aloud in its glee,
the god had so gloried in his own power that he cried:

"Who speaks of Apollo and his lyre? Some of the gods may be well
pleased with his music, and mayhap a bloodless man or two. But my
music strikes to the heart of the earth itself. It stirs with rapture
the very sap of the trees, and awakes to life and joy the innermost
soul of all things mortal."

Apollo heard his boast, and heard it angrily.

"Oh, thou whose soul is the soul of the untilled ground!" he said,
"wouldst thou place thy music, that is like the wind in the reeds,
beside my music, which is as the music of the spheres?"

And Pan, splashing with his goat's feet amongst the water-lilies of
the stream on the bank of which he sat, laughed loudly and cried:

"Yea, would I, Apollo! Willingly would I play thee a match--thou on
thy golden lyre--I on my reeds from the river."

Thus did it come to pass that Apollo and Pan matched against each
other their music, and King Midas was one of the judges.

First of all Pan took his fragile reeds, and as he played, the leaves
on the trees shivered, and the sleeping lilies raised their heads, and
the birds ceased their song to listen and then flew straight to their
mates. And all the beauty of the world grew more beautiful, and all
its terror grew yet more grim, and still Pan piped on, and laughed to
see the nymphs and the fauns first dance in joyousness and then
tremble in fear, and the buds to blossom, and the stags to bellow in
their lordship of the hills. When he ceased, it was as though a
tensely-drawn string had broken, and all the earth lay breathless and
mute. And Pan turned proudly to the golden-haired god who had listened
as he had spoken through the hearts of reeds to the hearts of men.

"Canst, then, make music like unto my music, Apollo?" he said.

Then Apollo, his purple robes barely hiding the perfection of his
limbs, a wreath of laurel crowning his yellow curls, looked down at
Pan from his godlike height and smiled in silence. For a moment his
hand silently played over the golden strings of his lyre, and then his
finger-tips gently touched them. And every creature there who had a
soul, felt that that soul had wings, and the wings sped them straight
to Olympus. Far away from all earth-bound creatures they flew, and
dwelt in magnificent serenity amongst the Immortals. No longer was
there strife, or any dispeace. No more was there fierce warring
between the actual and the unknown. The green fields and thick woods
had faded into nothingness, and their creatures, and the fair nymphs
and dryads, and the wild fauns and centaurs longed and fought no more,
and man had ceased to desire the impossible. Throbbing nature and
passionately desiring life faded into dust before the melody that
Apollo called forth, and when his strings had ceased to quiver and
only the faintly remembered echo of his music remained, it was as
though the earth had passed away and all things had become new.

For the space of many seconds all was silence.

Then, in low voice, Apollo asked:

"Ye who listen--who is the victor?"

And earth and sea and sky, and all the creatures of earth and sky, and
of the deep, replied as one:

"The victory is thine, Divine Apollo."

Yet was there one dissentient voice.

Midas, sorely puzzled, utterly un-understanding, was relieved when the
music of Apollo ceased. "If only Pan would play again," he murmured to
himself. "I wish to live, and Pan's music gives me life. I love the
woolly vine-buds and the fragrant pine-leaves, and the scent of the
violets in the spring. The smell of the fresh-ploughed earth is dear
to me, the breath of the kine that have grazed in the meadows of wild
parsley and of asphodel. I want to drink red wine and to eat and love
and fight and work and be joyous and sad, fierce and strong, and very
weary, and to sleep the dead sleep of men who live only as weak
mortals do."

Therefore he raised his voice, and called very loud: "Pan's music is
sweeter and truer and greater than the music of Apollo. Pan is the
victor, and I, King Midas, give him the victor's crown!"

With scorn ineffable the sun-god turned upon Midas, his peasant's face
transfigured by his proud decision. For a little he gazed at him in
silence, and his look might have turned a sunbeam to an icicle.

Then he spoke:

"The ears of an ass have heard my music," he said. "Henceforth shall
Midas have ass's ears."

And when Midas, in terror, clapped his hands to his crisp black hair,
he found growing far beyond it, the long, pointed ears of an ass.
Perhaps what hurt him most, as he fled away, was the shout of
merriment that came from Pan. And fauns and nymphs and satyrs echoed
that shout most joyously.

Willingly would he have hidden in the woods, but there he found no
hiding-place. The trees and shrubs and flowering things seemed to
shake in cruel mockery. Back to his court he went and sent for the
court hairdresser, that he might bribe him to devise a covering for
these long, peaked, hairy symbols of his folly. Gladly the hairdresser
accepted many and many oboli, many and many golden gifts, and all
Phrygia wondered, while it copied, the strange headdress of the king.

But although much gold had bought his silence, the court barber was
unquiet of heart. All day and all through the night he was tormented
by his weighty secret. And then, at length, silence was to him a
torture too great to be borne; he sought a lonely place, there dug a
deep hole, and, kneeling by it, softly whispered to the damp earth:
"King Midas has ass's ears."

Greatly relieved, he hastened home, and was well content until, on the
spot where his secret lay buried, rushes grew up. And when the winds
blew through them, the rushes whispered for all those who passed by to
hear: "King Midas has ass's ears! King Midas has ass's ears!" Those
who listen very carefully to what the green rushes in marshy places
whisper as the wind passes through them, may hear the same thing to
this day. And those who hear the whisper of the rushes may, perhaps,
give a pitying thought to Midas--the tragic comedian of mythology.




CEYX AND HALCYONE

    "St. Martin's summer, halcyon days."

        _King Henry VI_, i. 2, 131.


"Halcyon days"--how often is the expression made use of, how seldom do
its users realise from whence they have borrowed it.

"These were halcyon days," says the old man, and his memory wanders
back to a time when for him

      "All the world is young, lad,
    And all the trees are green;
    And every goose a swan, lad,
    And every lass a queen."

Yet the story of Halcyone is one best to be understood by the
heavy-hearted woman who wanders along the bleak sea-beach and strains
her weary eyes for the brown sail of the fishing-boat that will never
more return.

Over the kingdom of Thessaly, in the days of long ago, there reigned a
king whose name was Ceyx, son of Hesperus, the Day Star, and almost as
radiant in grace and beauty as was his father. His wife was the fair
Halcyone, daughter of Æolus, ruler of the winds, and most perfectly
did this king and queen love one another. Their happiness was unmarred
until there came a day when Ceyx had to mourn for the loss of a
brother. Following close on the heels of this disaster came direful
prodigies which led Ceyx to fear that in some way he must have
incurred the hostility of the gods. To him there was no way in which
to discover wherein lay his fault, and to make atonement for it, but
by going to consult the oracle of Apollo at Claros, in Ionia. When he
told Halcyone what he must do, she knew well that she must not try to
turn him from his solemn purpose, yet there hung over her heart a
black shadow of fear and of evil foreboding that no loving words of
assurance could drive away. Most piteously she begged him to take her
with him, but the king knew too well the dangers of the treacherous
Ægean Sea to risk on it the life of the woman that he loved so well.

"I promise," he said, "by the rays of my Father the Day Star, that if
fate permits I will return before the moon shall have twice rounded
her orb."

Down by the shore the sailors of King Ceyx awaited his coming, and
when with passionately tender love he and Halcyone had taken farewell
of each other, the rowers sat down on the benches and dipped their
long oars into the water.

With rhythmic swing they drove the great ship over the grey sea, while
Ceyx stood on deck and gazed back at his wife until his eyes could no
longer distinguish her from the rocks on the shore, nor could she any
longer see the white sails of the ship as it crested the restless
waves. Heavier still was her heart when she turned away from the
shore, and yet more heavy it grew as the day wore on and dark night
descended. For the air was full of the clamorous wailings of the
fierce winds whose joy it is to lash the waves into rage and to strew
with dead men and broken timber the angry, surf-beaten shore.

"My King," she sighed to herself. "My King! my Own!" And through the
weary hours she prayed to the gods to bring him safely back to her,
and many times she offered fragrant incense to Juno, protectress of
women, that she might have pity on a woman whose husband and true
lover was out in the storm, a plaything for ruthless winds and waves.

A helpless plaything was the king of Thessaly. Long ere the dim
evening light had made of the shore of his own land a faint, grey
line, the white-maned horses of Poseidon, king of the seas, began to
rear their heads, and as night fell, a black curtain, blotting out
every landmark, and all home-like things, the East Wind rushed across
the Ægean Sea, smiting the sea-horses into madness, seizing the sails
with cruel grasp and casting them in tatters before it, snapping the
mast as though it were but a dry reed by the river. Before so mighty a
tempest no oars could be of any avail, and for a little time only the
winds and waves gambolled like a half-sated wolf-pack over their
helpless prey. With hungry roar the great weight of black water stove
in the deck and swept the sailors out of the ship to choke them in its
icy depths; and ever it would lift the wounded thing high up on its
foaming white crests, as though to toss it to the dark sky, and ever
again would suck it down into the blackness, while the shrieking winds
drove it onward with howling taunts and mocking laughter. While life
stayed in him, Ceyx thought only of Halcyone. He had no fear, only
the fear of the grief his death must bring to her who loved him as he
loved her, his peerless queen, his Halcyone. His prayers to the gods
were prayers for her. For himself he asked one thing only--that the
waves might bear his body to her sight, so that her gentle hands might
lay him in his tomb. With shout of triumph that they had slain a king,
winds and waves seized him even as he prayed, and the Day Star that
was hidden behind the black pall of the sky knew that his son, a brave
king and a faithful lover, had gone down to the Shades.

When Dawn, the rosy-fingered, had come to Thessaly, Halcyone,
white-faced and tired-eyed, anxiously watched the sea, that still was
tossing in half-savage mood. Eagerly she gazed at the place where last
the white sail had been seen. Was it not possible that Ceyx, having
weathered the gale, might for the present have foregone his voyage to
Ionia, and was returning to her to bring peace to her heart? But the
sea-beach was strewn with wrack and the winds still blew bits of
tattered surf along the shore, and for her there was only the heavy
labour of waiting, of waiting and of watching for the ship that never
came. The incense from her altars blew out, in heavy sweetness, to
meet the bitter-sweet tang of the seaweed that was carried in by the
tide, for Halcyone prayed on, fearful, yet hoping that her prayers
might still keep safe her man--her king--her lover. She busied herself
in laying out the garments he would wear on his return, and in
choosing the clothes in which she might be fairest in his eyes. This
robe, as blue as the sky in spring--silver-bordered, as the sea in
kind mood is bordered with a feathery silver fringe. She could recall
just how Ceyx looked when first he saw her wear it. She could hear his
very tones as he told her that of all queens she was the peeress, of
all women the most beautiful, of all wives the most dear. Almost she
forgot the horrors of the night, so certain did it seem that his dear
voice must soon again tell her the words that have been love's litany
since ever time began.

In the ears of Juno those petitions for him whose dead body was even
then being tossed hither and thither by the restless waves, his
murderers, came at last to be more than even she could bear. She gave
command to her handmaiden Iris to go to the palace of Somnus, god of
Sleep and brother of Death, and to bid him send to Halcyone a vision,
in the form of Ceyx, to tell her that all her weary waiting was in
vain.

In a valley among the black Cimmerian mountains the death-god Somnus
had his abode. In her rainbow-hued robes, Iris darted through the sky
at her mistress's bidding, tingeing, as she sped through them, the
clouds that she passed. It was a silent valley that she reached at
last. Here the sun never came, nor was there ever any sound to break
the silence. From the ground the noiseless grey clouds, whose work it
is to hide the sun and moon, rose softly and rolled away up to the
mountain tops and down to the lowest valleys, to work the will of the
gods. All around the cave lurked the long dark shadows that bring fear
to the heart of children, and that, at nightfall, hasten the steps of
the timid wayfarer. No noise was there, but from far down the valley
there came a murmur so faint and so infinitely soothing that it was
less a sound than of a lullaby remembered in dreams. For past the
valley of Sleep flow the waters of Lethe, the river of Forgetfulness.
Close up to the door of the cave where dwelt the twin brothers, Sleep
and Death, blood-red poppies grew, and at the door itself stood
shadowy forms, their fingers on their lips, enjoining silence on all
those who would enter in, amaranth-crowned, and softly waving sheaves
of poppies that bring dreams from which there is no awakening. There
was there no gate with hinges to creak or bars to clang, and into the
stilly darkness Iris walked unhindered. From outer cave to inner cave
she went, and each cave she left behind was less dark than the one
that she entered. In the innermost room of all, on an ebony couch
draped with sable curtains, the god of sleep lay drowsing. His
garments were black, strewn with golden stars. A wreath of half-opened
poppies crowned his sleepy head, and he leaned on the strong shoulder
of Morpheus, his favourite son. All round his bed hovered pleasant
dreams, gently stooping over him to whisper their messages, like a
field of wheat swayed by the breeze, or willows that bow their silver
heads and murmur to each other the secrets that no one ever knows.
Brushing the idle dreams aside, as a ray of sunshine brushes away the
grey wisps of mist that hang to the hillside, Iris walked up to the
couch where Somnus lay. The light from her rainbow-hued robe lit up
the darkness of the cave, yet Somnus lazily only half-opened his
eyes, moved his head so that it rested more easily, and in a sleepy
voice asked of her what might be her errand. "Somnus," she said,
"gentlest of gods, tranquilliser of minds and soother of careworn
hearts, Juno sends you her commands that you despatch a dream to
Halcyone in the city of Trachine, representing her lost husband and
all the events of the wreck."

Her message delivered, Iris hastened away, for it seemed to her that
already her eyelids grew heavy, and that there were creeping upon her
limbs, throwing silver dust in her eyes, lulling into peaceful slumber
her mind, those sprites born of the blood-red poppies that bring to
weary mortals rest and sweet forgetfulness.

Only rousing himself sufficiently to give his orders, Somnus entrusted
to Morpheus the task imposed upon him by Juno, and then, with a yawn,
turned over on his downy pillow, and gave himself up to exquisite
slumber.

When he had winged his way to Trachine, Morpheus took upon himself the
form of Ceyx and sought the room where Halcyone slept. She had watched
the far horizon many hours that day. For many an hour had she vainly
burned incense to the gods. Tired in heart and soul, in body and in
mind, she laid herself down on her couch at last, hoping for the gift
of sleep. Not long had she slept, in the dead-still sleep that
weariness and a stricken heart bring with them, when Morpheus came and
stood by her side. He was only a dream, yet his face was the face of
Ceyx. Not the radiant, beautiful son of the Day Star was the Ceyx who
stood by her now and gazed on her with piteous, pitying dead eyes.
His clothing dripped sea-water; in his hair was tangled the weed of
the sea, uprooted by the storm. Pale, pale was his face, and his white
hands gripped the stones and sand that had failed him in his dying
agony.

Halcyone whimpered in her sleep as she looked on him, and Morpheus
stooped over her and spoke the words that he had been told to say.

"I am thy husband, Ceyx, Halcyone. No more do prayers and the
blue-curling smoke of incense avail me. Dead am I, slain by the storm
and the waves. On my dead, white face the skies look down and the
restless sea tosses my chill body that still seeks thee, seeking a
haven in thy dear arms, seeking rest on thy warm, loving heart."

With a cry Halcyone started up, but Morpheus had fled, and there were
no wet footprints nor drops of sea-water on the floor, marking, as she
had hoped, the way that her lord had taken. Not again did Sleep visit
her that night.

A grey, cold morning dawned and found her on the seashore. As ever,
her eyes sought the far horizon, but no white sail, a messenger of
hope, was there to greet her. Yet surely she saw something--a black
speck, like a ship driven on by the long oars of mariners who knew
well the path to home through the watery ways. From far away in the
grey it hasted towards her, and then there came to Halcyone the
knowledge that no ship was this thing, but a lifeless body, swept
onwards by the hurrying waves. Nearer and nearer it came, until at
length she could recognise the form of this flotsam and jetsam of the
sea. With heart that broke as she uttered the words, she stretched
out her arms and cried aloud: "O Ceyx! my Beloved! is it thus that
thou returnest to me?"

To break the fierce assaults of sea and of storm there had been built
out from the shore a mole, and on to this barrier leapt the distraught
Halcyone. She ran along it, and when the dead, white body of the man
she loved was still out of reach, she prayed her last prayer--a
wordless prayer of anguish to the gods.

"Only let me get near him," she breathed. "Grant only that I nestle
close against his dear breast. Let me show him that, living or dead, I
am his, and he mine forever."

And to Halcyone a great miracle was then vouchsafed, for from out of
her snowy shoulders grew snow-white pinions, and with them she skimmed
over the waves until she reached the rigid body of Ceyx, drifting, a
helpless burden for the conquering waves, in with the swift-flowing
tide. As she flew, she uttered cries of love and of longing, but only
strange raucous cries came from the throat that had once only made
music. And when she reached the body of Ceyx and would fain have
kissed his marble lips, Halcyone found that no longer were her own
lips like the petals of a fair red rose warmed by the sun. For the
gods had heard her prayer, and her horny beak seemed to the watchers
on the shore to be fiercely tearing at the face of him who had been
king of Thessaly.

[Illustration: A GREY COLD MORNING FOUND HER ON THE SEASHORE]

Yet the gods were not merciless--or, perhaps, the love of Halcyone was
an all-conquering love. For as the soul of Halcyone had passed into
the body of a white-winged sea-bird, so also passed the soul of her
husband the king. And for evermore Halcyone and her mate, known as the
Halcyon birds, defied the storm and tempest, and proudly breasted,
side by side, the angriest waves of the raging seas.

To them, too, did the gods grant a boon: that, for seven days before
the shortest day of the year, and for seven days after it, there
should reign over the sea a great calm in which Halcyone, in her
floating nest, should hatch her young. And to those days of calm and
sunshine, the name of the Halcyon Days was given.

And still, as a storm approaches, the white-winged birds come flying
inland with shrill cries of warning to the mariners whose ships they
pass in their flight.

"Ceyx!" they cry. "Remember Ceyx!"

And hastily the fishermen fill their sails, and the smacks drive
homeward to the haven where the blue smoke curls upwards from the
chimneys of their homesteads, and where the red poppies are nodding
sleepily amongst the yellow corn.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Note._--The kingfisher is commonly known as the real
    "Halcyon" bird. Of it Socrates says: "The bird is not
    great, but it has received great honour from the gods
    because of its lovingness; for while it is making its
    nest, all the world has the happy days which it calls
    halcyonidæ, excelling all others in their calmness."




ARISTÆUS THE BEE-KEEPER

    "... Every sound is sweet;
    Myriads of rivers hurrying thro' the lawn,
    The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
    And murmuring of innumerable bees."

        Tennyson.


In the fragrance of the blossom of the limes the bees are gleaning a
luscious harvest. Their busy humming sounds like the surf on a reef
heard from very far away, and would almost lull to sleep those who
lazily, drowsily spend the sunny summer afternoon in the shadow of the
trees. That line of bee-hives by the sweet-pea hedge shows where they
store their treasure that men may rob them of it, but out on the
uplands where the heather is purple, the wild bees hum in and out of
the honey-laden bells and carry home their spoils to their own free
fastnesses, from which none can drive them unless there comes a foray
against them from the brown men of the moors.

How many of us who watch their ardent labours know the story of
Aristæus--he who first brought the art of bee-keeping to perfection in
his own dear land of Greece, and whose followers are those men in
veils of blue and green, that motley throng who beat fire-irons and
create a hideous clamour in order that the queen bee and her excited
followers may be checked in their perilous voyagings and beguiled to
swarm in the sanctuary of a hive.

Aristæus was a shepherd, the son of Cyrene, a water nymph, and to him
there had come one day, as he listened to the wild bees humming
amongst the wild thyme, the great thought that he might conquer these
busy workers and make their toil his gain. He knew that hollow trees
or a hole in a rock were used as the storage houses of their treasure,
and so the wily shepherd lad provided for them the homes he knew that
they would covet, and near them placed all the food that they most
desired. Soon Aristæus became noted as a tamer of bees, and even in
Olympus they spoke of his honey as a thing that was food for the gods.
All might have gone well with Aristæus had there not come for him the
fateful day when he saw the beautiful Eurydice and to her lost his
heart. She fled before the fiery protestations of his love, and trod
upon the serpent whose bite brought her down to the Shades. The gods
were angry with Aristæus, and as punishment they slew his bees. His
hives stood empty and silent, and no more did "the murmuring of
innumerable bees" drowse the ears of the herds who watched their
flocks cropping the red clover and the asphodel of the meadows.

Underneath the swift-flowing water of a deep river, the nymph who was
the mother of Aristæus sat on her throne. Fishes darted round her
white feet, and beside her sat her attendants, spinning the fine
strong green cords that twine themselves round the throats of those
who perish when their arms can no longer fight against the force of
the rushing current. A nymph sang as she worked, an old, old song,
that told one of the old, old tales of man's weakness and the power of
the creatures of water, but above her song those who listened heard a
man's voice, calling loudly and pitifully.

The voice was that of Aristæus, calling aloud for his mother. Then his
mother gave command, and the waters of the river rolled asunder and
let Aristæus pass down far below to where the fountains of the great
rivers lie. A mighty roar of many waters dinned in his ears as the
rivers started on the race that was to bring them all at last to their
restless haven, the Ocean. To Cyrene he came at length, and to her
told his sorrowful tale:

"To men who live their little lives and work and die as I
myself--though son of a nymph and of a god--must do," he said, "I have
brought two great gifts, oh my mother. I have taught them that from
the grey olives they can reap a priceless harvest, and from me they
have learned that the little brown bees that hum in and out of the
flowers may be made slaves that bring to them the sweetest riches of
which Nature may be robbed."

"This do I already know, my son," said Cyrene, and smiled upon
Aristæus.

"Yet dost thou not know," said Aristæus, "the doom that has overtaken
my army of busy workers. No longer does there come from my city of
bees the boom of many wings and many busy little feet as they fly,
swift and strong, hither and thither, to bring back to the hives
their honeyed treasure. The comb is empty. The bees are all dead--or,
if not dead, they have forsaken me forever."

Then spoke Cyrene. "Hast heard, my son," she said, "of Proteus? It is
he who herds the flocks of the boundless sea. On days when the South
Wind and the North Wind wrestle together, and when the Wind from the
East smites the West Wind in shame before him, thou mayst see him
raise his snowy head and long white beard above the grey-green waves
of the sea, and lash the white-maned, unbridled, fierce sea-horses
into fury before him. Proteus only--none but Proteus--can tell thee by
what art thou canst win thy bees back once more."

Then Aristæus with eagerness questioned his mother how he might find
Proteus and gain from him the knowledge that he sought, and Cyrene
answered: "No matter how piteously thou dost entreat him, never, save
by force, wilt thou gain his secret from Proteus. Only if thou canst
chain him by guile as he sleeps and hold fast the chains, undaunted by
the shapes into which he has the power to change himself, wilt thou
win his knowledge from him."

Then Cyrene sprinkled her son with the nectar of the deathless gods,
and in his heart there was born a noble courage and through him a new
life seemed to run.

"Lead me now to Proteus, oh my mother!" he said, and Cyrene left her
throne and led him to the cave where Proteus, herdsman of the seas,
had his dwelling. Behind the seaweed-covered rocks Aristæus concealed
himself, while the nymph used the fleecy clouds for her covering. And
when Apollo drove his chariot across the high heavens at noon, and all
land and all sea were hot as molten gold, Proteus with his flocks
returned to the shade of his great cave by the sobbing sea, and on its
sandy floor he stretched himself, and soon lay, his limbs all lax and
restful, in the exquisite joy of a dreamless sleep. From behind the
rocks Aristæus watched him, and when, at length, he saw that Proteus
slept too soundly to wake gently he stepped forward, and on the
sleep-drowsed limbs of Proteus fixed the fetters that made him his
captive. Then, in joy and pride at having been the undoing of the
shepherd of the seas, Aristæus shouted aloud. And Proteus, awaking,
swiftly turned himself into a wild boar with white tusks that lusted
to thrust themselves into the thighs of Aristæus. But Aristæus,
unflinching, kept his firm hold of the chain. Next did he become a
tiger, tawny and velvet black, and fierce to devour. And still
Aristæus held the chain, and never let his eye fall before the glare
of the beast that sought to devour him. A scaly dragon came next,
breathing out flames, and yet Aristæus held him. Then came a lion, its
yellow pelt scented with the lust of killing, and while Aristæus yet
strove against him there came to terrify his listening ears the sound
of fire that lapped up and thirstily devoured all things that would
stand against it. And ere the crackle of the flames and their great
sigh of fierce desire had ceased, there came in his ears the sound of
many waters, the booming rush of an angry river in furious flood, the
irresistible command of the almighty waves of the sea. Yet still
Aristæus held the chains, and at last Proteus took his own shape
again, and with a sigh like the sigh of winds and waves on the
desolate places where ships become wrecks, and men perish and there is
never a human soul to save or to pity them, he spoke to Aristæus.

"Puny one!" he said, "and puny are thy wishes! Because thou didst by
thy foolish wooing send the beautiful Eurydice swiftly down to the
Shades and break the heart of Orpheus, whose music is the music of the
Immortals, the bees that thou hast treasured have left their hives
empty and silent. So little are the bees! so great, O Aristæus, the
bliss or woe of Orpheus and Eurydice! Yet, because by guile thou hast
won the power to gain from me the knowledge that thou dost seek,
hearken to me now, Aristæus! Four bulls must thou find--four cows of
equal beauty. Then must thou build in a leafy grove four altars, and
to Orpheus and Eurydice pay such funeral honours as may allay their
resentment. At the end of nine days, when thou hast fulfilled thy
pious task, return and see what the gods have sent thee."

"This will I do most faithfully, O Proteus," said Aristæus, and
gravely loosened the chains and returned to where his mother awaited
him, and thence travelled to his own sunny land of Greece.

Most faithfully, as he had said, did Aristæus perform his vow. And
when, on the ninth day, he returned to the grove of sacrifice, a sound
greeted him which made his heart stop and then go on beating and
throbbing as the heart of a man who has striven valiantly in a great
fight and to whom the battle is assured.

For, from the carcase of one of the animals offered for sacrifice, and
whose clean white bones now gleamed in the rays of the sun that forced
its way through the thick shade of the grove of grey olives, there
came the "murmuring of innumerable bees."

"Out of the eater came forth meat, out of the strong came forth
sweetness."

And Aristæus, a Samson of the old Greek days, rejoiced exceedingly,
knowing that his thoughtless sin was pardoned, and that for evermore
to him belonged the pride of giving to all men the power of taming
bees, the glory of mastering the little brown creatures that pillage
from the fragrant, bright-hued flowers their most precious treasure.




PROSERPINE

    "Sacred Goddess, Mother Earth,
    Thou from whose immortal bosom,
    Gods, and men, and beasts have birth,
    Leaf and blade, and bud and blossom,
    Breathe thine influence most divine
    On thine own child, Proserpine.

    If with mists of evening dew
    Thou dost nourish those young flowers
    Till they grow, in scent and hue,
    Fairest children of the hours,
    Breathe thine influence most divine
    On thine own child, Proserpine."

        Shelley.


The story of Persephone--of Proserpine--is a story of spring. When the
sun is warming the bare brown earth, and the pale primroses look up
through the snowy blackthorns at a kind, blue sky, almost can we hear
the soft wind murmur a name as it gently sways the daffodils and
breathes through the honey sweetness of the gold-powdered catkins on
the grey willows by the river--"Persephone! Persephone!"

Now once there was a time when there was no spring, neither summer nor
autumn, nor chilly winter with its black frosts and cruel gales and
brief, dark days. Always was there sunshine and warmth, ever were
there flowers and corn and fruit, and nowhere did the flowers grow
with more dazzling colours and more fragrant perfume than in the fair
garden of Sicily.

To Demeter, the Earth Mother, was born a daughter more fair than any
flower that grew, and ever more dear to her became her child, the
lovely Proserpine. By the blue sea, in the Sicilian meadows,
Proserpine and the fair nymphs who were her companions spent their
happy days. Too short were the days for all their joy, and Demeter
made the earth yet fairer than it was that she might bring more
gladness to her daughter Proserpine. Each day the blossoms that the
nymphs twined into garlands grew more perfect in form and in hue, but
from the anemones of royal purple and crimson, and the riotous red of
geraniums, Proserpine turned one morning with a cry of gladness, for
there stood before her beside a little stream, on one erect, slim
stem, a wonderful narcissus, with a hundred blossoms. Her eager hand
was stretched out to pluck it, when a sudden black cloud overshadowed
the land, and the nymphs, with shrieks of fear, fled swiftly away. And
as the cloud descended, there was heard a terrible sound, as of the
rushing of many waters or the roll of the heavy wheels of the chariot
of one who comes to slay. Then was the earth cleft open, and from it
there arose the four coal-black horses of Pluto, neighing aloud in
their eagerness, while the dark-browed god urged them on, standing
erect in his car of gold.

    "'The coal-black horses rise--they rise,
    O mother, mother!' low she cries--
    Persephone--Persephone!
    'O light, light, light!' she cries, 'farewell;
    The coal-black horses wait for me.
    O shade of shades, where I must dwell,
    Demeter, mother, far from thee!'"[5]

In cold, strong arms Pluto seized her--in that mighty grasp that will
not be denied, and Proserpine wept childish tears as she shivered at
his icy touch, and sobbed because she had dropped the flowers she had
picked, and had never picked the flower she most desired. While still
she saw the fair light of day, the little oddly-shaped rocky hills,
the vineyards and olive groves and flowery meadows of Sicily, she did
not lose hope. Surely the King of Terrors could not steal one so
young, so happy, and so fair. She had only tasted the joy of living,
and fain she would drink deeper in the coming years. Her mother must
surely save her--her mother who had never yet failed her--her mother,
and the gods.

But ruthless as the mower whose scythe cuts down the seeded grass and
the half-opened flower and lays them in swathes on the meadow, Pluto
drove on. His iron-coloured reins were loose on the black manes of his
horses, and he urged them forward by name till the froth flew from
their mouths like the foam that the furious surf of the sea drives
before it in a storm. Across the bay and along the bank of the river
Anapus they galloped, until, at the river head, they came to the pool
of Cyane. He smote the water with his trident, and downward into the
blackness of darkness his horses passed, and Proserpine knew no more
the pleasant light of day.

    "What ails her that she comes not home?
    Demeter seeks her far and wide,
    And gloomy-browed doth ceaseless roam
    From many a morn till eventide.
    'My life, immortal though it be,
    Is nought,' she cries, 'for want of thee,
    Persephone--Persephone!'"

So, to the great Earth Mother came the pangs that have drawn tears of
blood from many a mortal mother's heart for a child borne off to the
Shades.

    "'My life is nought for want of thee,--
    Persephone! Persephone!'" ...

The cry is borne down through the ages, to echo and re-echo so long as
mothers love and Death is still unchained.

Over land and sea, from where Dawn, the rosy-fingered, rises in the
East, to where Apollo cools the fiery wheels of his chariot in the
waters of far western seas, the goddess sought her daughter. With a
black robe over her head and carrying a flaming torch in either hand,
for nine dreary days she sought her loved one. And yet, for nine more
weary days and nine sleepless nights the goddess, racked by human
sorrow, sat in hopeless misery. The hot sun beat upon her by day. By
night the silver rays from Diana's car smote her more gently, and the
dew drenched her hair and her black garments and mingled with the
saltness of her bitter tears. At the grey dawning of the tenth day her
elder daughter, Hecate, stood beside her. Queen of ghosts and shades
was she, and to her all dark places of the earth were known.

"Let us go to the Sun God," said Hecate. "Surely he hath seen the god
who stole away the little Proserpine. Soon his chariot will drive
across the heavens. Come, let us ask him to guide us to the place
where she is hidden."

Thus did they come to the chariot of the glorious Apollo, and standing
by the heads of his horses like two grey clouds that bar the passage
of the sun, they begged him to tell them the name of him who had
stolen fair Proserpine.

"No less a thief was he," said Apollo, "than Pluto, King of Darkness
and robber of Life itself. Mourn not, Demeter. Thy daughter is safe in
his keeping. The little nymph who played in the meadows is now Queen
of the Shades. Nor does Pluto love her vainly. She is now in love with
Death."

No comfort did the words of the Sun God bring to the longing soul of
Demeter. And her wounded heart grew bitter. Because she suffered,
others must suffer as well. Because she mourned, all the world must
mourn. The fragrant flowers spoke to her only of Persephone, the
purple grapes reminded her of a vintage when the white fingers of her
child had plucked the fruit. The waving golden grain told her that
Persephone was as an ear of wheat that is reaped before its time.

Then upon the earth did there come dearth and drought and barrenness.

    "The wheat
    Was blighted in the ear, the purple grapes
    Blushed no more on the vines, and all the gods
    Were sorrowful ..."

        Lewis Morris.

Gods and men alike suffered from the sorrow of Demeter. To her, in
pity for the barren earth, Zeus sent an embassy, but in vain it came.
Merciless was the great Earth Mother, who had been robbed of what she
held most dear.

"Give me back my child!" she said. "Gladly I watch the sufferings of
men, for no sorrow is as my sorrow. Give me back my child, and the
earth shall grow fertile once more."

Unwillingly Zeus granted the request of Demeter.

"She shall come back," he said at last, "and with thee dwell on earth
forever. Yet only on one condition do I grant thy fond request.
Persephone must eat no food through all the time of her sojourn in the
realm of Pluto, else must thy beseeching be all in vain."

Then did Demeter gladly leave Olympus and hasten down to the darkness
of the shadowy land that once again she might hold, in her strong
mother's arms, her who had once been her little clinging child.

But in the dark kingdom of Pluto a strange thing had happened. No
longer had the pale-faced god, with dark locks, and eyes like the
sunless pools of a mountain stream, any terrors for Proserpine. He was
strong, and cruel had she thought him, yet now she knew that the touch
of his strong, cold hands was a touch of infinite tenderness. When,
knowing the fiat of the ruler of Olympus, Pluto gave to his stolen
bride a pomegranate, red in heart as the heart of a man, she had taken
it from his hand, and, because he willed it, had eaten of the sweet
seeds. Then, in truth, it was too late for Demeter to save her child.
She "had eaten of Love's seed" and "changed into another."

    "He takes the cleft pomegranate seeds:
    'Love, eat with me this parting day;'
    Then bids them fetch the coal-black steeds--
    'Demeter's daughter, wouldst away?'
    The gates of Hades set her free;
    'She will return full soon,' saith he--
    'My wife, my wife Persephone.'"

        Ingelow.

Dark, dark was the kingdom of Pluto. Its rivers never mirrored a
sunbeam, and ever moaned low as an earthly river moans before a coming
flood, and the feet that trod the gloomy Cocytus valley were the feet
of those who never again would tread on the soft grass and flowers of
an earthly meadow. Yet when Demeter had braved all the shadows of
Hades, only in part was her end accomplished. In part only was
Proserpine now her child, for while half her heart was in the
sunshine, rejoicing in the beauties of earth, the other half was with
the god who had taken her down to the Land of Darkness and there had
won her for his own. Back to the flowery island of Sicily her mother
brought her, and the peach trees and the almonds blossomed snowily as
she passed. The olives decked themselves with their soft grey leaves,
the corn sprang up, green and lush and strong. The lemon and orange
groves grew golden with luscious fruit, and all the land was carpeted
with flowers. For six months of the year she stayed, and gods and men
rejoiced at the bringing back of Proserpine. For six months she left
her green and pleasant land for the dark kingdom of him whom she
loved, and through those months the trees were bare, and the earth
chill and brown, and under the earth the flowers hid themselves in
fear and awaited the return of the fair daughter of Demeter.

And evermore has she come and gone, and seedtime and harvest have
never failed, and the cold, sleeping world has awaked and rejoiced,
and heralded with the song of birds, and the bursting of green buds
and the blooming of flowers, the resurrection from the dead--the
coming of spring.

    "Time calls, and Change
    Commands both men and gods, and speeds us on
    We know not whither; but the old earth smiles
    Spring after spring, and the seed bursts again
    Out of its prison mould, and the dead lives
    Renew themselves, and rise aloft and soar
    And are transformed, clothing themselves with change,
    Till the last change be done."

        Lewis Morris.


FOOTNOTE:

[5] Jean Ingelow.




LATONA AND THE RUSTICS


Through the tropic nights their sonorous, bell-like booming can be
heard coming up from the marshes, and when they are unseen, the song
of the bull-frogs would suggest creatures full of solemn dignity. The
croak of their lesser brethren is less impressive, yet there is no
escape from it on those evenings when the dragon-flies' iridescent
wings are folded in sleep, and the birds in the branches are still,
when the lilies on the pond have closed their golden hearts, and even
the late-feeding trout have ceased to plop and to make eddies in the
quiet water. "Krroak! krroak! krroak!" they go--"krroak! krroak!
krroak!"

It is unceasing, unending. It goes on like the whirr of the wheels of
a great clock that can never run down--a melancholy complaint against
the hardships of destiny--a raucous protest against things as they
are.

This is the story of the frogs that have helped to point the gibes of
Aristophanes, the morals of Æsop, and which have always been, more or
less, regarded as the low comedians of the animal world.

Latona, or Leto, was the goddess of dark nights, and upon her the
mighty Zeus bestowed the doubtful favour of his errant love. Great was
the wrath of Hera, his queen, when she found that she was no longer
the dearest wife of her omnipotent lord, and with furious upbraidings
she banished her rival to earth. And when Latona had reached the place
of her exile she found that the vengeful goddess had sworn that she
would place her everlasting ban upon anyone, mortal or immortal, who
dared to show any kindness or pity to her whose only fault had been
that Zeus loved her. From place to place she wandered, an outcast even
among men, until, at length, she came to Lycia.

One evening, as the darkness of which she was goddess had just begun
to fall, she reached a green and pleasant valley. The soft, cool grass
was a delight to her tired feet, and when she saw the silvery gleam of
water she rejoiced, for her throat was parched and her lips dry and
she was very weary. By the side of this still pond, where the lilies
floated, there grew lithe grey willows and fresh green osiers, and
these were being cut by a crowd of chattering rustics.

Humbly, for many a rude word and harsh rebuff had the dictum of Hera
brought her during her wanderings, Latona went to the edge of the
pond, and, kneeling down, was most thankfully about to drink, when the
peasants espied her. Roughly and rudely they told her to begone, nor
dare to drink unbidden of the clear water beside which their willows
grew. Very pitifully Latona looked up in their churlish faces, and her
eyes were as the eyes of a doe that the hunters have pressed very
hard.

"Surely, good people," she said, and her voice was sad and low, "water
is free to all. Very far have I travelled, and I am aweary almost to
death. Only grant that I dip my lips in the water for one deep
draught. Of thy pity grant me this boon, for I perish of thirst."

Harsh and coarse were the mocking voices that made answer. Coarser
still were the jests that they made. Then one, bolder than his
fellows, spurned her kneeling figure with his foot, while another
brushed before her and stepping into the pond, defiled its clarity by
churning up the mud that lay below with his great splay feet.

Loudly the peasants laughed at this merry jest, and they quickly
followed his lead, as brainless sheep will follow the one that
scrambles through a gap. Soon they were all joyously stamping and
dancing in what had so lately been a pellucid pool. The water-lilies
and blue forget-me-nots were trodden down, the fish that had their
homes under the mossy stones in terror fled away. Only the mud came
up, filthy, defiling, and the rustics laughed in loud and foolish
laughter to see the havoc they had wrought.

The goddess Latona rose from her knees. No longer did she seem a mere
woman, very weary, hungry and athirst, travelled over far. In their
surprised eyes she grew to a stature that was as that of the deathless
gods. And her eyes were dark as an angry sea at even.

"Shameless ones!" she said, in a voice as the voice of a storm that
sweeps destroyingly over forest and mountain. "Ah! shameless ones! Is
it thus that thou wouldst defy one who has dwelt on Olympus? Behold
from henceforth shalt thou have thy dwelling in the mud of the
green-scummed pools, thy homes in the water that thy flat feet have
defiled."

As she spoke, a change, strange and terrible, passed over the forms of
the trampling peasants. Their stature shrank. They grew squat and fat.
Their hands and feet were webbed, and their grinning mouths became
great, sad, gaping openings by which to swallow worms and flies. Green
and yellow and brown were their skins, and when they would fain have
cried aloud for mercy, from their throats there would come only the
"_Krroak! krroak! krroak!_" that we know so well.

And when, that night, the goddess of darkness was wrapped in peace in
the black, silver star bespangled robe that none could take from her,
there arose from the pond over which the grey willows hung, weeping,
the clamour of a great lamentation. Yet no piteous words were there,
only the incessant, harsh complaint of the frogs that we hear in the
marshes.

From that time the world went well with Latona. Down to the seashore
she came, and when she held out her arms in longing appeal to the
Ægean islands that lay like purple flowers strewn, far apart, on a
soft carpet of limpid blue, Zeus heard her prayer. He asked Poseidon
to send a dolphin to carry the woman he loved to the floating island
of Delos, and when she had been borne there in safety, he chained the
island with chains of adamant to the golden-sanded floor of the sea.

And on this sanctuary there were born to Latona twin children,
thereafter to be amongst the most famed of the deathless gods--the
god and goddess, Apollo and Diana.

    "... Those hinds that were transformed to frogs
    Railed at Latona's twin-born progeny,
    Which after held the sun and moon in fee."

        Milton.

Yet are there times, as we look at the squat, bronze bodies of the
frogs--green-bronze, dark brown spotted, and all flecked with gold,
the turned-down corners of their wistful mouths, their very exquisite
black velvety eyes with golden rims--when the piteous croaks that come
forth from their throats of pale daffodil colour do indeed awake a
sympathy with their appeal against the inexorable decrees of destiny.

"We did not know! We did not understand! Pity us! Ah, pity us!
_Krroak! krroak! krroak!_"




ECHO AND NARCISSUS


In the solitudes of the hills we find her, and yet we may come on her
unawares in the din of a noisy city. She will answer us where the
waves are lashing themselves against the rugged cliffs of our own
British coast, or we may find her where the great yellow pillars of
fallen temples lie hot in the sun close to the vivid blue water of the
African sea. At nightfall, on the lonely northern moors, she mimics
the cry of a wailing bird that calls for its mate, but it is she who
prolongs the roll of the great organ in a vast cathedral, she who
repeats the rattle and crack and boom of the guns, no matter in what
land the war may be raging. In the desolate Australian bush she makes
the crash of the falling limb of a dead gum tree go on and on, and
tortures the human being who is lost, hopelessly lost, and facing a
cruel death, by repeating his despairing calls for help. Through the
night, in old country-houses, she sports at will and gives new life to
sad old tales of the restless dead who restlessly walk. But she echoes
the children's voices as they play by the seashore or pick primroses
in the woods in spring, and when they greet her with laughter, she
laughs in merry response. They may fear her when the sun has gone
down, and when they are left all alone they begin to dread her
mockery. Yet the nymph who sought for love and failed to gain what
she sought must surely find some comfort on those bright days of
summer and of spring when she gives the little children happiness and
they give her their love.

When all the world was young, and nymphs and fauns and dryads dwelt in
the forests, there was no nymph more lovely and more gay than she
whose name was Echo. Diana would smile on her for her fleetness of
foot when she followed her in the chase, and those whom she met in the
leafy pathways of the dim, green woods, would pass on smiling at the
remembrance of her merry chatter and her tricksy humour.

It was an evil day for Echo when she crossed the path of Hera, queen
of the gods. The jealous goddess sought her errant husband, who was
amusing himself with some nymphs, and Echo, full of mischievous glee,
kept her in talk until the nymphs had fled to safety. Hera was furious
indeed when she found out that a frolicsome nymph had dared to play on
her such a trick, and ruthlessly she spoke fair Echo's doom.

"Henceforth," she said, "the tongue with which thou hast cheated me
shall be in bonds. No longer wilt thou have the power to speak in
greeting. To the tongues of others shall thy tongue be slave, and from
this day until time shall cease thou shalt speak only to repeat the
last words that have fallen on thine ears."

A maimed nymph indeed was Echo then, yet whole in all that matters
most, in that her merry heart was still her own. But only for a little
while did this endure.

Narcissus, the beautiful son of a nymph and a river god, was hunting
in a lonely forest one day when Echo saw him pass. To her he seemed
more fair than god or man, and once she had seen him she knew that she
must gain his love or die. From that day on, she haunted him like his
shadow, gliding from tree to tree, nestling down amongst thick fern
and undergrowth, motionless as one who stalks a wild thing, watching
him afar off while he rested, gladdening her eyes with his beauty. So
did she feed her hungering heart, and sought to find contentment by
looking on his face each day.

To her at length came a perfect moment when Narcissus was separated
from his companions in the chase and, stopping suddenly where the
evening sun chequered the pathway of the forest with black and gold,
heard the nymph's soft footfall on the rustling leaves.

"Who's here?" he called.

"_Here!_" answered Echo.

Narcissus, peering amongst the trees' long shadows and seeing no one,
called "Come!"

And "_Come!_" called the glad voice of Echo, while the nymph, with
fast-beating heart, felt that her day of happiness had come indeed.

"Why do you shun me?" then called Narcissus.

"_Why do you shun me?_" Echo repeated.

"Let us join one another," said the lad, and the simple words seemed
turned into song when Echo said them over.

"_Let us join one another!_" she said, and not Eos herself, as with
rosy fingers she turns aside the dark clouds of night, could be fairer
than was the nymph as she pushed aside the leaves of the trackless
wood, and ran forward with white arms outstretched to him who was lord
of her life.

[Illustration: SHE HAUNTED HIM LIKE HIS SHADOW]

With cold eyes and colder heart the one she loved beheld her.

"Away!" he cried, shrinking back as if from something that he hated.
"_Away!_ I would rather die than that you should have me!"

"_Have me!_" cried Echo pitifully, but she pled in vain. Narcissus had
no love to give her, and his scorn filled her with shame. Thenceforth
in the forest revels she never more was seen, and the nymphs danced
gaily as ever, with never a care for her who had faded and gone away
as completely as though she were a blossom in the passing of spring.
In the solitude of mountain cliffs and caves and rocky places, and in
the loneliest depths of the forest, Echo hid her grief, and when the
winds blew through the dark branches of the trees at night, moaning
and sighing, they could hear far below them the voice of Echo
repeating their lamentations. For her, long nights followed hopeless
days, and nights and days only told her that her love was all in vain.
Then came a night when the winds no longer saw the figure of the
nymph, white and frail as a broken flower, crouching close to the
rocks they passed over. Grief had slain the body of Echo. Only her
voice was left to repeat their mocking laughter, their wistful
sighs--only her voice that lives on still though all the old gods are
gone, and but few there are who know her story.

Heartwhole and happy, Narcissus, slayer of happiness, went on his
way, and other nymphs besides fair Echo suffered from loving him in
vain. One nymph, less gentle than Echo, poured the tale of her love
that was scorned into the sympathetic ears of the goddess of Love, and
implored her to punish Narcissus.

Hot and tired from the chase, Narcissus sought one day a lonely pool
in the woods, there to rest and to quench his thirst.

    "In some delicious ramble, he had found
    A little space, with boughs all woven round;
    And in the midst of all, a clearer pool
    Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool
    The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping
    Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping."

As he stooped down to drink, a face looked at his through the crystal
clear water, and a pair of beautiful eyes met his own. His surprise
and joy at the sight of what he felt sure must be the most beautiful
creature on earth, was evidently shared by the nymph of the pool, who
gazed fearlessly up at him.

Round her head she had a nimbus of curls than which that of
Adonis--nay, of the sun-god himself, was not more perfect, while her
eyes were like the brown pools of water in a rippling mountain stream,
flecked with sunshine, yet with depths untold. When Narcissus smiled
at her in rapture, her red lips also parted in a smile. He stretched
out his arms towards her, and her arms were stretched to him. Almost
trembling in his delight, he slowly stooped to kiss her. Nearer she
drew to him, nearer still, but when his mouth would have given itself
to that other mouth that was formed like the bow of Eros--a thing to
slay hearts--only the chilly water of the pool touched his lips, and
the thing of his delight vanished away. In passionate disappointment
Narcissus waited for her to return, and as soon as the water of the
pool grew still, once more he saw her exquisite face gazing wistfully
up into his. Passionately he pled with the beautiful creature--spoke
of his love--besought her to have pity on him, but although the face
in the pool reflected his every look of adoration and of longing, time
and again he vainly tried to clasp in his arms what was but the
mirrored likeness of himself.

In full measure had the avenging goddess meted out to Narcissus the
restless longing of unsatisfied love. By day and by night he haunted
the forest pool, and ere long the face that looked back at his was
pale as a lily in the dawn. When the moonbeams came straying down
through the branches and all the night was still, they found him
kneeling by the pool, and the white face that the water mirrored had
the eyes of one of the things of the woods to which a huntsman has
given a mortal wound. Mortally wounded he truly was, slain, like many
another since his day, by a hopeless love for what was in truth but an
image, and that an image of his own creation. Even when his shade
passed across the dark Stygian river, it stooped over the side of the
boat that it might try to catch a glimpse of the beloved one in the
inky waters.

Echo and the other nymphs were avenged, yet when they looked on the
beautiful dead Narcissus, they were filled with sorrow, and when they
filled the air with their lamentations, most piteously did the voice
of Echo repeat each mournful cry. Even the gods were pitiful, and when
the nymphs would have burned the body on a funeral pyre which their
own fair hands had built for him, they sought it in vain. For the
Olympians had turned Narcissus into a white flower, the flower that
still bears his name and keeps his memory sweet.

                  "A lonely flower he spied,
    A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
    Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness,
    To woo its own sad image into nearness;
    Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move,
    But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love."

        Keats.




ICARUS


Fourteen years only have passed since our twentieth century began. In
those fourteen years how many a father's and mother's heart has bled
for the death of gallant sons, greatly-promising, greatly-daring, who
have sought to rule the skies? With wings not well enough tried, they
have soared dauntlessly aloft, only to add more names to the tragic
list of those whose lives have been sacrificed in order that the
groping hands of science may become sure, so that in time the sons of
men may sail through the heavens as fearlessly as their fathers sailed
through the seas.

High overhead we watch the monoplane, the great, swooping thing, like
a monster black-winged bird, and our minds travel back to the story of
Icarus, who died so many years ago that there are those who say that
his story is but a foolish fable, an idle myth.

Dædalus, grandson of a king of Athens, was the greatest artificer of
his day. Not only as an architect was he great, but as a sculptor he
had the creative power, not only to make men and women and animals
that looked alive, but to cause them to move and to be, to all
appearances, endowed with life. To him the artificers who followed him
owed the invention of the axe, the wedge, the wimble, and the
carpenter's level, and his restless mind was ever busy with new
inventions. To his nephew, Talus, or Perdrix, he taught all that he
himself knew of all the mechanical arts. Soon it seemed that the
nephew, though he might not excel his uncle, equalled Dædalus in his
inventive power. As he walked by the seashore, the lad picked up the
spine of a fish, and, having pondered its possibilities, he took it
home, imitated it in iron, and so invented the saw. A still greater
invention followed this. While those who had always thought that there
could be none greater than Dædalus were still acclaiming the lad,
there came to him the idea of putting two pieces of iron together,
connecting them at one end with a rivet, and sharpening both ends, and
a pair of compasses was made. Louder still were the acclamations of
the people. Surely greater than Dædalus was here. Too much was this
for the artist's jealous spirit.

One day they stood together on the top of the Acropolis, and Dædalus,
murder that comes from jealousy in his heart, threw his nephew down.
Down, down he fell, knowing well that he was going to meet a cruel
death, but Pallas Athené, protectress of all clever craftsmen, came to
his rescue. By her Perdrix was turned into the bird that still bears
his name, and Dædalus beheld Perdrix, the partridge, rapidly winging
his way to the far-off fields. Since then, no partridge has ever built
or roosted in a high place, but has nestled in the hedge-roots and
amongst the standing corn, and as we mark it we can see that its
flight is always low.

For his crime Dædalus was banished from Athens, and in the court of
Minos, king of Crete, he found a refuge. He put all his mighty powers
at the service of Minos, and for him designed an intricate labyrinth
which, like the river Meander, had neither beginning nor ending, but
ever returned on itself in hopeless intricacy. Soon he stood high in
the favour of the king, but, ever greedy for power, he incurred, by
one of his daring inventions, the wrath of Minos. The angry monarch
threw him into prison, and imprisoned along with him his son, Icarus.
But prison bars and locks did not exist that were strong enough to
baffle this master craftsman, and from the tower in which they were
shut, Dædalus and his son were not long in making their escape. To
escape from Crete was a less easy matter. There were many places in
that wild island where it was easy for the father and son to hide, but
the subjects of Minos were mostly mariners, and Dædalus knew well that
all along the shore they kept watch lest he should make him a boat,
hoist on it one of the sails of which he was part inventor, and speed
away to safety like a sea-bird driven before the gale. Then did there
come to Dædalus, the pioneer of inventions, the great idea that by his
skill he might make a way for himself and his son through another
element than water. And he laughed aloud in his hiding place amongst
the cypresses on the hillside at the thought of how he would baffle
the simple sailormen who watched each creek and beach down on the
shore. Mockingly, too, did he think of King Minos, who had dared to
pit his power against the wits and skill of Dædalus, the mighty
craftsman.

Many a Cretan bird was sacrificed before the task which the inventor
had set himself was accomplished. In a shady forest on the mountains
he fashioned light wooden frames and decked them with feathers, until
at length they looked like the pinions of a great eagle, or of a swan
that flaps its majestic way from lake to river. Each feather was bound
on with wax, and the mechanism of the wings was so perfect a
reproduction of that of the wings from which the feathers had been
plucked, that on the first day that he fastened them to his back and
spread them out, Dædalus found that he could fly even as the bird
flew. Two pairs he made; having tested one pair, a second pair was
made for Icarus, and, circling round him like a mother bird that
teaches her nestlings how to fly, Dædalus, his heart big with the
pride of invention, showed Icarus how he might best soar upwards to
the sun or dive down to the blue sea far below, and how he might
conquer the winds and the air currents of the sky and make them his
servants.

That was a joyous day for father and son, for the father had never
before drunk deeper of the intoxicating wine of the gods--Success--and
for the lad it was all pure joy. Never before had he known freedom and
power so utterly glorious. As a little child he had watched the birds
fly far away over the blue hills to where the sun was setting, and had
longed for wings that he might follow them in their flight. At times,
in his dreams, he had known the power, and in his dreaming fancy had
risen from the cumbering earth and soared high above the trees and
fields on strong pinions that bore him away to the fair land of
heart's desire--to the Islands of the Blessed. But when Sleep left
him and the dreams silently slipped out before the coming of the light
of day, and the boy sprang from his couch and eagerly spread his arms
as, in his dreams, he had done, he could no longer fly. Disappointment
and unsatisfied longing ever came with his waking hours. Now all that
had come to an end, and Dædalus was glad and proud as well to watch
his son's joy and his fearless daring. One word of counsel only did he
give him.

"Beware, dear son of my heart," he said, "lest in thy new-found power
thou seekest to soar even to the gates of Olympus. For as surely as
the scorching rays from the burnished wheels of the chariot of Apollo
smite thy wings, the wax that binds on thy feathers will melt, and
then will come upon thee and on me woe unutterable."

In his dreams that night Icarus flew, and when he awoke, fearing to
find only the haunting remembrance of a dream, he found his father
standing by the side of his bed of soft leaves under the shadowy
cypresses, ready to bind on his willing shoulders the great pinions
that he had made.

Gentle Dawn, the rosy-fingered, was slowly making her way up from the
East when Dædalus and Icarus began their flight. Slowly they went at
first, and the goat-herds who tended their flocks on the slopes of
Mount Ida looked up in fear when they saw the dark shadows of their
wings and marked the monster birds making their way out to sea. From
the river beds the waterfowl arose from the reeds, and with great
outcry flew with all their swiftness to escape them. And down by the
seashore the mariners' hearts sank within them as they watched,
believing that a sight so strange must be a portent of disaster.
Homewards they went in haste to offer sacrifices on the altars of
Poseidon, ruler of the deep.

Samos and Delos were passed on the left and Lebynthos on the right,
long ere the sun-god had started on his daily course, and as the
mighty wings of Icarus cleft the cold air, the boy's slim body grew
chilled, and he longed for the sun's rays to turn the waters of the
Ægean Sea over which he flew from green-grey into limpid sapphire and
emerald and burning gold. Towards Sicily he and his father bent their
course, and when they saw the beautiful island afar off lying like a
gem in the sea, Apollo made the waves in which it lay, for it a
fitting setting. With a cry of joy Icarus marked the sun's rays paint
the chill water, and Apollo looked down at the great white-winged
bird, a snowy swan with the face and form of a beautiful boy, who sped
exulting onwards, while a clumsier thing, with wings of darker hue,
followed less quickly, in the same line of flight. As the god looked,
the warmth that radiated from his chariot touched the icy limbs of
Icarus as with the caressing touch of gentle, life-giving hands. Not
long before, his flight had lagged a little, but now it seemed as if
new life was his. Like a bird that wheels and soars and dives as if
for lightness of heart, so did Icarus, until each feather of his
plumage had a sheen of silver and of gold. Down, down, he darted, so
near the water that almost the white-tipped waves caught at his wings
as he skimmed over them. Then up, up, up he soared, ever higher,
higher still, and when he saw the radiant sun-god smiling down on
him, the warning of Dædalus was forgotten. As he had excelled other
lads in foot races, now did Icarus wish to excel the birds themselves.
Dædalus he left far behind, and still upwards he mounted. So strong he
felt, so fearless was he, that to him it seemed that he could storm
Olympus, that he could call to Apollo as he swept past him in his
flight, and dare him to race for a wager from the Ægean Sea to where
the sun-god's horses took their nightly rest by the trackless seas of
the unknown West.

In terror his father watched him, and as he called to him in a voice
of anguished warning that was drowned by the whistling rush of the air
currents through the wings of Icarus and the moist whisper of the
clouds as through them he cleft a way for himself, there befell the
dreaded thing. It seemed as though the strong wings had begun to lose
their power. Like a wounded bird Icarus fluttered, lunged sidewise
from the straight, clean line of his flight, recovered himself, and
fluttered again. And then, like the bird into whose soft breast the
sure hand of a mighty archer has driven an arrow, downwards he fell,
turning over and yet turning again, downwards, ever downwards, until
he fell with a plunge into the sea that still was radiant in shining
emerald and translucent blue.

Then did the car of Apollo drive on. His rays had slain one who was
too greatly daring, and now they fondled the little white feathers
that had fallen from the broken wings and floated on the water like
the petals of a torn flower.

On the dead, still face of Icarus they shone, and they spangled as if
with diamonds the wet plumage that still, widespread, bore him up on
the waves.

Stricken at heart was Dædalus, but there was no time to lament his
son's untimely end, for even now the black-prowed ships of Minos might
be in pursuit. Onward he flew to safety, and in Sicily built a temple
to Apollo, and there hung up his wings as a propitiatory offering to
the god who had slain his son.

And when grey night came down on that part of the sea that bears the
name of Icarus to this day, still there floated the body of the boy
whose dreams had come true. For only a little while had he known the
exquisite realisation of dreamed-of potentialities, for only a few
hours tasted the sweetness of perfect pleasure, and then, by an
over-daring flight, had lost it all for ever.

The sorrowing Nereids sang a dirge over him as he was swayed gently
hither and thither by the tide, and when the silver stars came out
from the dark firmament of heaven and were reflected in the blackness
of the sea at night, it was as though a velvet pall, silver-decked in
his honour, was spread around the slim white body with its
outstretched snowy wings.

So much had he dared--so little accomplished.

Is it not the oft-told tale of those who have followed Icarus? Yet who
can say that gallant youth has lived in vain when, as Icarus did, he
has breasted the very skies, has flown with fearless heart and soul to
the provinces of the deathless gods?--when, even for the space of a
few of the heart-beats of Time, he has tasted supreme power--the
ecstasy of illimitable happiness?




CLYTIE


The sunbeams are basking on the high walls of the old garden--smiling
on the fruit that grows red and golden in their warmth. The bees are
humming round the bed of purple heliotrope, and drowsily murmuring in
the shelter of the soft petals of the blush roses whose sweetness
brings back the fragrance of days that are gone. On the old grey
sundial the white-winged pigeons sleepily croon as they preen their
snowy plumage, and the Madonna lilies hang their heads like a
procession of white-robed nuns who dare not look up from telling their
beads until the triumphal procession of an all-conquering warrior has
gone by. What can they think of that long line of tall yellow flowers
by the garden wall, who turn their faces sunwards with an arrogant
assurance, and give stare for stare to golden-haired Apollo as he
drives his blazing car triumphant through the high heavens?

"Sunflowers" is the name by which we know those flamboyant blossoms
which somehow fail so wholly to suggest the story of Clytie, the nymph
whose destruction came from a faithful, unrequited love. She was a
water-nymph, a timid, gentle being who frequented lonely streams, and
bathed where the blue dragon-flies dart across the white water-lilies
in pellucid lakes. In the shade of the tall poplar trees and the
silvery willows she took her midday rest, and feared the hours when
the flowers drooped their heads and the rippling water lost its
coolness before the fierce glare of the sun.

But there came a day when, into the dark pool by which she sat, Apollo
the Conqueror looked down and mirrored his face. And nevermore did she
hide from the golden-haired god who, from the moment when she had seen
in the water the picture of his radiant beauty, became the lord and
master of her heart and soul. All night she awaited his coming, and
the Dawn saw her looking eastward for the first golden gleams from the
wheels of his chariot. All day she followed him with her longing gaze,
nor did she ever cease to feast her eyes upon his beauty until the
last reflection of his radiance had faded from the western sky.

Such devotion might have touched the heart of the sun-god, but he had
no wish to own a love for which he had not sought. The nymph's
adoration irked him, nor did pity come as Love's pale substitute when
he marked how, day by day, her face grew whiter and more white, and
her lovely form wasted away. For nine days, without food or drink, she
kept her shamed vigil. Only one word of love did she crave. Unexacting
in the humility of her devotion, she would gratefully have nourished
her hungry heart upon one kindly glance. But Apollo, full of scorn and
anger, lashed up his fiery steeds as he each day drove past her, nor
deigned for her a glance more gentle than that which he threw on the
satyrs as they hid in the dense green foliage of the shadowy woods.

Half-mocking, Diana said, "In truth the fair nymph who throws her
heart's treasures at the feet of my golden-locked brother that he may
trample on them, is coming to look like a faded flower!" And, as she
spoke, the hearts of the other immortal dwellers in Olympus were
stirred with pity.

"A flower she shall be!" they said, "and for all time shall she live,
in life that is renewed each year when the earth stirs with the
quickening of spring. The long summer days shall she spend forever in
fearless worship of the god of her love!"

And, as they willed, the nymph passed out of her human form, and took
the form of a flower, and evermore--the emblem of constancy--does she
gaze with fearless ardour on the face of her love.

    "The heart that has truly loved never forgets,
      But as truly loves on to the close;
    As the sunflower turns on her god when he sets
      The same look that she turned when he rose."

Some there are who say that not into the bold-faced sunflower did her
metamorphosis take place, but into that purple heliotrope that gives
an exquisite offering of fragrance to the sun-god when his warm rays
touch it. And in the old walled garden, while the bees drowsily hum,
and the white pigeons croon, and the dashing sunflower gives Apollo
gaze for gaze, and the scent of the mignonette mingles with that of
clove pinks and blush roses, the fragrance of the heliotrope is, above
all, worthy incense to be offered upon his altar by the devout lover
of a god.




THE CRANES OF IBYCUS

    "For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
    With most miraculous organ."

        Shakespeare.


Ibycus, the poet friend of Apollo, was a happy man as he journeyed on
foot through the country where the wild flowers grew thick and the
trees were laden with blossom towards the city of Corinth. His tuneful
voice sang snatches of song of his own making, and ever and again he
would try how his words and music sounded on his lyre. He was light of
heart, because ever had he thought of good, and not evil, and had
always sung only of great and noble deeds and of those things that
helped his fellow-men. And now he went to Corinth for the great
chariot-races, and for the great contest of musicians where every true
poet and musician in Greece was sure to be found.

It was the time of the return to earth of Adonis and of Proserpine,
and as he was reverently about to enter the sacred grove of Poseidon,
where the trees grew thick, and saw, crowning the height before him,
the glittering towers of Corinth, he heard, overhead, the harsh cries
of some other returned exiles. Ibycus smiled, as he looked up and
beheld the great flock of grey birds, with their long legs and strong,
outstretched wings, come back from their winter sojourn on the golden
sands of Egypt, to dance and beck and bow to each other by the marshes
of his homeland.

"Welcome back, little brothers!" he cried. "May you and I both meet
with naught but kindness from the people of this land!"

And when the cranes again harshly cried, as if in answer to his
greeting, the poet walked gaily on, further into the shadow of that
dark wood out of which he was never to pass as living man. Joyous, and
fearing no evil, he had been struck and cast to the ground by cruel
and murderous hands ere ever he knew that two robbers were hidden in a
narrow pass where the brushwood grew thick. With all his strength he
fought, but his arms were those of a musician and not of a warrior,
and very soon he was overpowered by those who assailed him. He cried
in vain to gods and to men for help, and in his final agony he heard
once more the harsh voices of the migratory birds and the rush of
their speeding wings. From the ground, where he bled to death, he
looked up to them.

"Take up my cause, dear cranes!" he said, "since no voice but yours
answers my cry!"

And the cranes screamed hoarsely and mournfully as if in farewell, as
they flapped their way towards Corinth and left the poet lying dead.

When his body was found, robbed and terribly wounded, from all over
Greece, where he was known and loved, there uprose a great clamour of
lamentation.

"Is it thus I find you restored to me?" said he who had expected him
in Corinth as his honoured guest; "I who hoped to place the victor's
laurels on your head when you triumphed in the temple of song!"

And all those whom the loving personality of Ibycus and the charm of
his music had made his friends were alert and eager to avenge so foul
a murder. But none knew how the wicked deed had come to pass--none,
save the cranes.

Then came the day to which Ibycus had looked forward with such joy,
when thousands upon thousands of his countrymen sat in the theatre at
Cyprus and watched a play that stirred their hearts within them.

The theatre had for roof the blue vault of heaven; the sun served for
footlights and for the lights above the heads of those who acted. The
three Furies--the Eumenides--with their hard and cruel faces and snaky
locks, and with blood dripping from their eyes, were represented by
actors so great that the hearts of their beholders trembled within
them. In their dread hands lay the punishment of murder, of
inhospitality, of ingratitude, and of all the cruellest and basest of
crimes. Theirs was the duty of hurrying the doomed spirits entrusted
to their merciless care over the Phlegethon, the river of fire that
flows round Hades, and through the brazen gates that led to Torment,
and their robes were robes worn

    "With all the pomp of horror, dy'd in gore."

        Virgil.

In solemn cadence, while the thousands of beholders watched and
listened enthralled, the Furies walked round the theatre and sang
their song of terror:

"Woe! woe! to him whose hands are soiled with blood! The darkness
shall not hide him, nor shall his dread secret lie hidden even in the
bowels of the earth! He shall not seek by flight to escape us, for
vengeance is ours, and swifter than a hawk that strikes its quarry
shall we strike. Unwearying we pursue, nor are our swift feet and our
avenging arms made slow by pity. Woe! woe! to the shedder of innocent
blood, for nor peace nor rest is his until we have hurried his
tormented soul down to torture that shall endure everlastingly!"

As the listeners heard the dirge of doom, there were none who did not
think of Ibycus, the gentle-hearted poet, so much beloved and so
foully done to death, and in the tensity of the moment when the voices
ceased, a great thrill passed over the multitudes as a voice, shrill
with amazed horror, burst from one of the uppermost benches:

"_See there! see there! behold, comrade, the cranes of Ibycus!_"

Every eye looked upwards, and, harshly crying, there passed overhead
the flock of cranes to whom the poet had entrusted his dying message.
Then, like an electric shock, there came to all those who beheld the
knowledge that he who had cried aloud was the murderer of Ibycus.

"Seize him! seize him!" cried in unison the voices of thousands.
"Seize the man, and him to whom he spoke!"

Frantically the trembling wretch tried to deny his words, but it was
too late. The roar of the multitudes was as that of an angry sea that
hungers for its prey and will not be denied. He who had spoken and him
to whom he spoke were seized by a score of eager hands.

In white-faced terror, because the Furies had hunted them down, they
made confession of their crime and were put to death. And the flock of
grey-plumaged, rosy-headed cranes winged their way on to the marshes,
there to beck and bow to each other, and to dance in the golden
sunset, well content because their message was delivered, and Ibycus,
the poet-musician who had given them welcome, was avenged.




SYRINX

    "Is it because the wild-wood passion still lingers in
    our hearts, because still in our minds the voice of
    Syrinx lingers in melancholy music, the music of regret
    and longing, that for most of us there is so potent a
    spell in running waters?"

        Fiona Macleod.


As the evening shadows lengthen, and the night wind softly steals
through the trees, touching with restless fingers the still waters of
the little lochans that would fain have rest, there can be heard a
long, long whisper, like a sigh. There is no softer, sadder note to be
heard in all Pan's great orchestra, nor can one marvel that it should
be so, for the whisper comes from the reeds who gently sway their
heads while the wind passes over them as they grow by lonely lake or
river.

This is the story of Syrinx, the reed, as Ovid has told it to us.

In Arcadia there dwelt a nymph whose name was Syrinx. So fair she was
that for her dear sake fauns and satyrs forgot to gambol, and sat in
the green woods in thoughtful stillness, that they might see her as
she passed. But for none of them had Syrinx a word of kindness. She
had no wish for love.

    "But as for Love, truly I know him not,
    I have passionately turned my lips therefrom,
    And from that fate the careless gods allot."

        Lady Margaret Sackville.

To one only of the gods did she give her loyal allegiance. She
worshipped Diana, and with her followed the chase. As she lightly sped
through the forest she might have been Diana herself, and there were
those who said they would not know nymph from goddess, but that the
goddess carried a silver bow, while that of Syrinx was made of horn.
Fearless, and without a care or sorrow, Syrinx passed her happy days.
Not for all the gold of Midas would she have changed places with those
love-lorn nymphs who sighed their hearts out for love of a god or of a
man. Heartwhole, fancy free, gay and happy and lithe and strong, as a
young boy whose joy it is to run and to excel in the chase, was
Syrinx, whose white arms against the greenwood trees dazzled the eyes
of the watching fauns when she drew back her bow to speed an arrow at
the stag she had hunted since early dawn. Each morning that she awoke
was the morning of a day of joy; each night that she lay down to rest,
it was to sleep as a child who smiles in his sleep at the remembrance
of a perfect day.

But to Syrinx, who knew no fear, Fear came at last. She was returning
one evening from the shadowy hills, untired by the chase that had
lasted for many an hour, when, face to face, she met with one whom
hitherto she had only seen from afar. Of him the other nymphs spoke
often. Who was so great as Pan?--Pan, who ruled the woods. None could
stand against Pan. Those who defied him must ever come under his power
in the end. He was Fear; he was Youth; he was Joy; he was Love; he was
Beast; he was Power; he was Man; he was God. He was Life itself. So
did they talk, and Syrinx listened with a smile. Not Pan himself could
bring Fear to her.

Yet when he met her in the silent loneliness of a great forest and
stood in her path and gazed on her with eyes of joyous amazement that
one so fair should be in his kingdom without his having had knowledge
of it, Syrinx felt something come to her heart that never before had
assailed it.

Pan's head was crowned with sharp pine-leaves. His face was young and
beautiful, and yet older than the mountains and the seas. Sadness and
joy were in his eyes at the same time, and at the same moment there
looked out from them unutterable tenderness and merciless cruelty. For
only a little space of time did he stand and hold her eyes with his
own, and then in low caressing voice he spoke, and his words were like
the song of a bird to his mate, like the call of the earth to the sun
in spring, like the lap of the waves when they tell the rocks of their
eternal longing. Of love he spoke, of love that demanded love, and of
the nymph's most perfect beauty. Yet as he spoke, the unknown thing
came and smote with icy hands the heart of Syrinx.

"Ah! I have Fear! I have Fear!" she cried, and more cruel grew the
cruelty in the eyes of Pan, but his words were still the words of
passionate tenderness. Like a bird that trembles, helpless, before the
serpent that would slay it, so did Syrinx the huntress stand, and her
face in the shade of the forest was like a white lily in the night.
But when the god would have drawn her close to him and kissed her red
lips, Fear leapt to Terror, and Terror winged her feet. Never in the
chase with Diana had she run as now she ran. But like a rushing storm
did Pan pursue her, and when he laughed she knew that what the nymphs
had said was true--he was Power--he was Fear--he was Beast--he was
Life itself. The darkness of the forest swiftly grew more dark. The
climbing trails of ivy and the fragrant creeping plants caught her
flying feet and made her stumble. Branches and twigs grew alive and
snatched at her and baulked her as she passed. Trees blocked her path.
All Nature had grown cruel, and everywhere there seemed to her to be a
murmur of mocking laughter, laughter from the creatures of Pan,
echoing the merciless merriment of their lord and master. Nearer he
came, ever nearer. Almost she could feel his breath on her neck; but
even as he stretched out his arms to seize the nymph whose breath came
with sobs like that of a young doe spent by the chase, they reached
the brink of the river Ladon. And to her "watery sisters" the nymphs
of the river, Syrinx breathed a desperate prayer for pity and for
help, then stumbled forward, a quarry run to the death.

With an exultant shout, Pan grasped her as she fell. And lo, in his
arms he held no exquisite body with fiercely beating heart, but a
clump of slender reeds. Baffled he stood for a little space, and, as
he stood, the savagery of the beast faded from his eyes that were
fathomless as dark mountain tarns where the sun-rays seldom come, and
there came into them a man's unutterable woe. At the reeds by the
river he gazed, and sighed a great sigh, the sigh that comes from the
heart of a god who thinks of the pain of the world. Like a gentle
zephyr the sigh breathed through the reeds, and from the reeds there
came a sound as of the sobbing sorrow of the world's desire. Then Pan
drew his sharp knife, and with it he cut seven of the reeds that grew
by the murmuring river.

"Thus shalt thou still be mine, my Syrinx," he said.

Deftly he bound them together, cut them into unequal lengths, and
fashioned for himself an instrument, that to this day is called the
Syrinx, or Pan's Pipes.

So did the god make music.

And all that night he sat by the swift-flowing river, and the music
from his pipe of reeds was so sweet and yet so passing sad, that it
seemed as though the very heart of the earth itself were telling of
its sadness. Thus Syrinx still lives--still dies:

    "A note of music by its own breath slain,
    Blown tenderly from the frail heart of a reed,"

and as the evening light comes down on silent places and the trembling
shadows fall on the water, we can hear her mournful whisper through
the swaying reeds, brown and silvery-golden, that grow by lonely
lochan and lake and river.




THE DEATH OF ADONIS

    "The fairest youth that ever maiden's dream conceived."

        Lewis Morris.


The ideally beautiful woman, a subject throughout the centuries for
all the greatest powers of sculptor's and painter's art, is Venus, or
Aphrodite, goddess of beauty and of love. And he who shares with her
an unending supremacy of perfection of form is not one of the gods,
her equals, but a mortal lad, who was the son of a king.

As Aphrodite sported one day with Eros, the little god of love, by
accident she wounded herself with one of his arrows. And straightway
there came into her heart a strange longing and an ache such as the
mortal victims of the bow of Eros knew well. While still the ache
remained, she heard, in a forest of Cyprus, the baying of hounds and
the shouts of those who urged them on in the chase. For her the chase
possessed no charms, and she stood aside while the quarry burst
through the branches and thick undergrowth of the wood, and the hounds
followed in hot pursuit. But she drew her breath sharply, and her eyes
opened wide in amazed gladness, when she looked on the perfect beauty
of the fleet-footed hunter, who was only a little less swift than the
shining spear that sped from his hand with the sureness of a bolt from
the hand of Zeus. And she knew that this must be none other than
Adonis, son of the king of Paphos, of whose matchless beauty she had
heard not only the dwellers on earth, but the Olympians themselves
speak in wonder. While gods and men were ready to pay homage to his
marvellous loveliness, to Adonis himself it counted for nothing. But
in the vigour of his perfect frame he rejoiced; in his fleetness of
foot, in the power of that arm that Michael Angelo has modelled, in
the quickness and sureness of his aim, for the boy was a mighty hunter
with a passion for the chase.

Aphrodite felt that her heart was no longer her own, and knew that the
wound that the arrow of Eros had dealt would never heal until she knew
that Adonis loved her. No longer was she to be found by the Cytherian
shores or in those places once held by her most dear, and the other
gods smiled when they beheld her vying with Diana in the chase and
following Adonis as he pursued the roe, the wolf, and the wild boar
through the dark forest and up the mountain side. The pride of the
goddess of love must often have hung its head. For her love was a
thing that Adonis could not understand. He held her "Something better
than his dog, a little dearer than his horse," and wondered at her
whim to follow his hounds through brake and marsh and lonely forest.
His reckless courage was her pride and her torture. Because he was to
her so infinitely dear, his path seemed ever bestrewn with dangers.
But when she spoke to him with anxious warning and begged him to
beware of the fierce beasts that might one day turn on him and bring
him death, the boy laughed mockingly and with scorn.

There came at last a day when she asked him what he did on the morrow,
and Adonis told her with sparkling eyes that had no heed for her
beauty, that he had word of a wild boar, larger, older, more fierce
than any he had ever slain, and which, before the chariot of Diana
next passed over the land of Cyprus, would be lying dead with a
spear-wound through it.

With terrible foreboding, Aphrodite tried to dissuade him from his
venture.

    "O, be advised: thou know'st not what it is
    With javelin's point a churlish swine to gore,
    Whose tushes never sheathed he whetteth still,
    Like to a mortal butcher, bent to kill.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Alas, he naught esteems that face of thine,
    To which love's eyes pay tributary gazes;
    Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eyne,
    Whose full perfection all the world amazes;
    But having thee at vantage--wondrous dread!--
    Would root these beauties as he roots the mead."

        Shakespeare.

To all her warnings, Adonis would but give smiles. Ill would it become
him to slink abashed away before the fierceness of an old monster of
the woods, and, laughing in the pride of a whole-hearted boy at a
woman's idle fears, he sped homewards with his hounds.

With the gnawing dread of a mortal woman in her soul, Aphrodite spent
the next hours. Early she sought the forest that she might again plead
with Adonis, and maybe persuade him, for love of her, to give up the
perilous chase because she loved him so.

But even as the rosy gates of the Dawn were opening, Adonis had begun
his hunt, and from afar off the goddess could hear the baying of his
hounds. Yet surely their clamour was not that of hounds in full cry,
nor was it the triumphant noise that they so fiercely make as they
pull down their vanquished quarry, but rather was it baying, mournful
as that of the hounds of Hecate. Swift as a great bird, Aphrodite
reached the spot from whence came the sound that made her tremble.

Amidst the trampled brake, where many a hound lay stiff and dead,
while others, disembowelled by the tusks of the boar, howled aloud in
mortal agony, lay Adonis. As he lay, he "knew the strange, slow chill
which, stealing, tells the young that it is death."

And as, _in extremis_, he thought of past things, manhood came to
Adonis and he knew something of the meaning of the love of
Aphrodite--a love stronger than life, than time, than death itself.
His hounds and his spear seemed but playthings now. Only the
eternities remained--bright Life, and black-robed Death.

Very still he lay, as though he slept; marble-white, and beautiful as
a statue wrought by the hand of a god. But from the cruel wound in the
white thigh, ripped open by the boar's profaning tusk, the red blood
dripped, in rhythmic flow, crimsoning the green moss under him. With a
moan of unutterable anguish, Aphrodite threw herself beside him, and
pillowed his dear head in her tender arms. Then, for a little while,
life's embers flickered up, his cold lips tried to form themselves
into a smile of understanding and held themselves up to hers. And,
while they kissed, the soul of Adonis passed away.

    "A cruel, cruel wound on his thigh hath Adonis, but a
    deeper wound in her heart doth Cytherea[6] bear. About
    him his dear hounds are loudly baying, and the nymphs of
    the wild woods wail him; but Aphrodite with unbound
    locks through the glades goes wandering--wretched, with
    hair unbraided, with feet unsandalled, and the thorns as
    she passes wound her and pluck the blossom of her sacred
    blood. Shrill she wails as down the woodland she is
    borne.... And the rivers bewail the sorrows of
    Aphrodite, and the wells are weeping Adonis on the
    mountains. The flowers flush red for anguish, and
    Cytherea through all the mountain-knees, through every
    dell doth utter piteous dirge:

    "'_Woe, woe for Cytherea, he hath perished, the lovely
    Adonis!_'"

        Bion.

Passionately the god besought Zeus to give her back her lost love, and
when there was no answer to her prayers, she cried in bitterness: "Yet
shall I keep a memorial of Adonis that shall be to all everlasting!"
And, as she spoke, her tears and his blood, mingling together, were
turned into flowers.

"A tear the Paphian sheds for each blood-drop of Adonis, and tears and
blood on the earth are turned to flowers. The blood brings forth the
roses, the tears, the wind-flower."

Yet, even then, the grief of Aphrodite knew no abatement. And when
Zeus, wearied with her crying, heard her, to his amazement, beg to be
allowed to go down to the Shades that she might there endure eternal
twilight with the one of her heart, his soul was softened.

"Never can it be that the Queen of Love and of Beauty leaves Olympus
and the pleasant earth to tread for evermore the dark Cocytus valley,"
he said. "Nay, rather shall I permit the beauteous youth of thy love
to return for half of each year from the Underworld that thou and he
may together know the joy of a love that hath reached fruition."

Thus did it come to pass that when dark winter's gloom was past,
Adonis returned to the earth and to the arms of her who loved him.

    "But even in death, so strong is love,
    I could not wholly die; and year by year,
    When the bright springtime comes, and the earth lives,
    Love opens these dread gates, and calls me forth
    Across the gulf. Not here, indeed, she comes,
    Being a goddess and in heaven, but smooths
    My path to the old earth, where still I know
    Once more the sweet lost days, and once again
    Blossom on that soft breast, and am again
    A youth, and rapt in love; and yet not all
    As careless as of yore; but seem to know
    The early spring of passion, tamed by time
    And suffering, to a calmer, fuller flow,
    Less fitful, but more strong."

        Lewis Morris.

And when the time of the singing of birds has come, and the flowers
have thrown off their white snow pall, and the brown earth grows
radiant in its adornments of green blade and of fragrant blossom, we
know that Adonis has returned from his exile, and trace his footprints
by the fragile flower that is his very own, the white flower with the
golden heart, that trembles in the wind as once the white hands of a
grief-stricken goddess shook for sorrow.

"The flower of Death" is the name that the Chinese give to the
wind-flower--the wood-anemone. Yet surely the flower that was born of
tears and of blood tells us of a life that is beyond the grave--of a
love which is unending.

The cruel tusk of a rough, remorseless winter still yearly slays the
"lovely Adonis" and drives him down to the Shades. Yet we know that
Spring, with its _Sursum Corda_, will return as long as the earth
shall endure; even as the sun must rise each day so long as time shall
last, to make

    "Le ciel tout en fleur semble une immense rose
    Qu'un Adonis céleste a teinte de son sang."

        De Heredia.


FOOTNOTE:

[6] Aphrodite.




PAN

    "What was he doing, the great god Pan,
      Down in the reeds by the river?
    Spreading ruin and scattering ban,
    Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat,
    And breaking the golden lilies afloat
      With the dragon-fly on the river.

    He tore out a reed, the great god Pan,
      From the deep cool bed of the river:
    The limpid water turbidly ran,
    And the broken lilies a-dying lay,
    And the dragon-fly had fled away,
      Ere he brought it out of the river.

               *   *   *   *   *

    'This is the way,' laughed the great god Pan
      (Laughed while he sat by the river),
    'The only way, since gods began
    To make sweet music, they could succeed.'
    Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed,
      He blew in power by the river.

    Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan!
      Piercing sweet by the river!
    Blinding sweet, O great god Pan!
    The sun on the hill forgot to die,
    And the lilies revived, and the dragon-fly
      Came back to dream on the river.

    Yet half a beast is the great god Pan,
      To laugh as he sits by the river,
    Making a poet out of a man:
    The true gods sigh for the cost and pain,
    For the reed which grows nevermore again
      As a reed with the reeds in the river."

        E. B. Browning.


Were we to take the whole of that immense construction of fable that
was once the religion of Greece, and treat it as a vast play in which
there were many thousands of actors, we should find that one of these
actors appeared again and again. In one scene, then in another, in
connection with one character, then with another, unexpectedly
slipping out from the shadows of the trees from the first act even to
the last, we should see Pan--so young and yet so old, so heedlessly
gay, yet so infinitely sad.

If, rather, we were to regard the mythology of Greece as a colossal
and wonderful piece of music, where the thunders of Jupiter and the
harsh hoof-beats of the fierce black steeds of Pluto, the king whose
coming none can stay, made way for the limpid melodies of Orpheus and
the rustling whisper of the footfall of nymphs and of fauns on the
leaves, through it all we should have an ever-recurring _motif_--the
clear, magical fluting of the pipes of Pan.

We have the stories of Pan and of Echo, of Pan and of Midas, of Pan
and Syrinx, of Pan and Selene, of Pan and Pitys, of Pan and Pomona.
Pan it was who taught Apollo how to make music. It was Pan who spoke
what he deemed to be comfort to the distraught Psyche; Pan who gave
Diana her hounds. The other gods had their own special parts in the
great play that at one time would have Olympus for stage, at another
the earth. Pan was Nature incarnate. He was the Earth itself.

Many are the stories of his genealogy, but the one that is given in
one of the Homeric hymns is that Hermes, the swift-footed young god,
wedded Dryope, the beautiful daughter of a shepherd in Arcadia, and
to them was born, under the greenwood tree, the infant, Pan. When
Dryope first looked on her child, she was smitten with horror, and
fled away from him. The deserted baby roared lustily, and when his
father, Hermes, examined him he found a rosy-cheeked thing with prick
ears and tiny horns that grew amongst his thick curls, and with the
dappled furry chest of a faun, while instead of dimpled baby legs he
had the strong, hairy hind legs of a goat. He was a fearless creature,
and merry withal, and when Hermes had wrapped him up in a hare skin,
he sped to Olympus and showed his fellow-gods the son that had been
born to him and the beautiful nymph of the forest. Baby though he was,
Pan made the Olympians laugh. He had only made a woman, his own
mother, cry; all others rejoiced at the new creature that had come to
increase their merriment. And Bacchus, who loved him most of all, and
felt that here was a babe after his own heart, bestowed on him the
name by which he was forever known--Pan, meaning _All_.

Thus Pan grew up, the earthly equal of the Olympians, and, as he grew,
he took to himself the lordship of woods and of solitary places. He
was king of huntsmen and of fishermen, lord of flocks and herds and of
all the wild creatures of the forest. All living, soulless things
owned him their master; even the wild bees claimed him as their
overlord. He was ever merry, and when a riot of music and of laughter
slew the stillness of the shadowy woods, it was Pan who led the
dancing throng of white-limbed nymphs and gambolling satyrs, for whom
he made melody from the pipes for whose creation a maid had perished.

Round his horns and thick curls he presently came to wear a crown of
sharp pine-leaves, remembrance of another fair nymph whose destruction
he had brought about.

Pitys listened to the music of Pan, and followed him even as the
children followed the Pied Piper of later story. And ever his playing
lured her further on and into more dangerous and desolate places,
until at length she stood on the edge of a high cliff whose pitiless
front rushed sheer down to cruel rocks far below. There Pan's music
ceased, and Pitys knew all the joy and the sorrow of the world as the
god held out his arms to embrace her. But neither Pan nor Pitys had
remembrance of Boreas, the merciless north wind, whose love the nymph
had flouted.

Ere Pan could touch her, a blast, fierce and strong as death, had
seized the nymph's fragile body, and as a wind of March tears from the
tree the first white blossom that has dared to brave the ruthless
gales, and casts it, torn and dying, to the earth, so did Boreas grip
the slender Pitys and dash her life out on the rocks far down below.
From her body sprang the pine tree, slender, erect, clinging for dear
life to the sides of precipices, and by the prickly wreath he always
wore, Pan showed that he held her in fond remembrance.

Joy, and youth, and force, and spring, was Pan to all the creatures
whose overlord he was. Pan meant the richness of the sap in the trees,
the lushness of grass and of the green stems of the blue hyacinths and
the golden daffodils; the throbbing of growth in the woodland and in
the meadows; the trilling of birds that seek for their mates and find
them; the coo of the doves on their nests of young; the arrogant
virility of bulls and of stags whose lowing and belling wake the
silence of the hills; the lightness of heart that made the nymphs
dance and sing, the fauns leap high, and shout aloud for very joy of
living. All of these things was Pan to those of his own kingdom.

Yet to the human men and women who had also listened to his playing,
Pan did not mean only joyousness. He was to them a force that many
times became a terror because of its sheer irresistibleness.

While the sun shone and the herdsmen could see the nodding white
cotton-grass, the asphodel, and the golden kingcups that hid the black
death-traps of the pitiless marshes, they had no fear of Pan. Nor in
the daytime, when in the woods the sunbeams played amongst the trees
and the birds sang of Spring and of love, and the syrinx sent an echo
from far away that made the little silver birches give a whispering
laugh of gladness and the pines cease to sigh, did man or maid have
any fear. Yet when darkness fell on the land, terror would come with
it, and, deep in their hearts, they would know that the terror was
Pan. Blindly, madly, they would flee from something that they could
not see, something they could barely hear, and many times rush to
their own destruction. And there would be no sweet sound of music
then, only mocking laughter. _Panic_ was the name given to this
fear--the name by which it still is known. And, to this day, panic
yet comes, and not only by night, but only in very lonely places.
There are those who have known it, and for shame have scarce dared to
own it, in highland glens, in the loneliness of an island in the
western sea, in a green valley amongst the "solemn, kindly,
round-backed hills" of the Scottish Border, in the remoteness of the
Australian bush. They have no reasons to give--or their reasons are
far-fetched. Only, to them as to Mowgli, _Fear_ came, and the fear
seemed to them to come from a malignant something from which they must
make all haste to flee, did they value safety of mind and of body. Was
it for this reason that the Roman legionaries on the Great Wall so
often reared altars in that lonely land of moor and mountain where so
many of them fought and died--

    "_To Pan, and to the Sylvan deities_"?

For surely Pan was there, where the curlew cried and the pewit
mourned, and sometimes the waiting soldiers must almost have imagined
his mocking laughter borne in the winds that swept across the bleak
hills of their exiled solitude.

He who was surely one of the bravest of mankind, one who always, in
his own words, "clung to his paddle," writes of such a fear when he
escaped death by drowning from the Oise in flood.

"The devouring element in the universe had leaped out against me, in
this green valley quickened by a running stream. The bells were all
very pretty in their way, but I had heard some of the hollow notes of
Pan's music. Would the wicked river drag me down by the heels,
indeed? and look so beautiful all the time? Nature's good humour was
only skin-deep, after all."

And of the reeds he writes: "Pan once played upon their forefathers;
and so, by the hands of his river, he still plays upon these later
generations down all the valley of the Oise; and plays the same air,
both sweet and shrill, to tell us of the beauty and the terror of the
world."

"_The Beauty and the terror of the world_"--was not this what Pan
stood for to the Greeks of long ago?

The gladness of living, the terror of living--the exquisite joy and
the infinite pain--that has been the possession of Pan--for we have
not yet found a more fitting title--since ever time began. And because
Pan is as he is, from him has evolved a higher Pantheism. We have done
away with his goat's feet and his horns, although these were handed on
from him to Satan when Christianity broke down the altars of Paganism.

"Nature, which is the Time-vesture of God and reveals Him to the wise,
hides Him from the foolish," writes Carlyle. Pan is Nature, and Nature
is not the ugly thing that the Calvinists would once have had us
believe it to be. Nature is capable of being made the garment of God.

    "In Being's floods, in Action's storm,
    I walk and work, above, beneath,
    Work and weave in endless motion!
            Birth and Death,
            An infinite ocean;
            A seizing and giving
            The fire of Living;
    'Tis thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply,
    And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by."

So speaks the _Erdgeist_ in Goethe's _Faust_, and yet another of the
greatest of the poets writes:

    "The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills and the plains--
    Are not these, O Soul, the Vision of Him who reigns?

               *   *   *   *   *

    And the ear of man cannot hear, and the eye of man cannot see;
    But if we could see and hear, this Vision--were it not He?"

        Tennyson.

Carlyle says that "The whole universe is the Garment of God," and he
who lives very close to Nature must, at least once in a lifetime,
come, in the solitude of the lonely mountain tops, upon that bush that
burns and is not yet consumed, and out of the midst of which speaks
the voice of the Eternal.

The immortal soul--the human body--united, yet ever in conflict--that
is Pan. The sighing and longing for things that must endure
everlastingly--the riotous enjoyment of the beauty of life--the
perfect appreciation of the things that are. Life is so real, so
strong, so full of joyousness and of beauty,--and on the other side of
a dark stream, cold, menacing, cruel, stands Death. Yet Life and Death
make up the sum of existence, and until we, who live our paltry little
lives here on earth in the hope of a Beyond, can realise what is the
true air that is played on those pipes of Pan, there is no hope for us
of even a vague comprehension of the illimitable Immortality.

It is a very old tale that tells us of the passing of Pan. In the
reign of Tiberius, on that day when, on the hill of Calvary, at
Jerusalem in Syria, Jesus Christ died as a malefactor, on the
cross--"And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness all
over the earth"--Thamus, an Egyptian pilot, was guiding a ship near
the islands of Paxæ in the Ionian Sea; and to him came a great voice,
saying, "Go! make everywhere the proclamation, _Great Pan is dead!_"

And from the poop of his ship, when, in great heaviness of heart,
because for him the joy of the world seemed to have passed away,
Thamus had reached Palodes, he shouted aloud the words that he had
been told. Then, from all the earth there arose a sound of great
lamentation, and the sea and the trees, the hills, and all the
creatures of Pan sighed in sobbing unison an echo of the pilot's
words--"_Pan is dead--Pan is dead._"

    "The lonely mountains o'er
    And the resounding shore,
    A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
    From haunted spring and dale
    Edg'd with poplar pale,
    The parting genius is with sighing sent;
    With flow'r-inwoven tresses torn,
    The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn."

        Milton.

Pan was dead, and the gods died with him.

    "Gods of Hellas, gods of Hellas,
    Can ye listen in your silence?
    Can your mystic voices tell us
    Where ye hide? In floating islands,
    With a wind that evermore
    Keeps you out of sight of shore?
          Pan, Pan is dead.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Gods! we vainly do adjure you,--
    Ye return nor voice nor sign!
    Not a votary could secure you
    Even a grave for your Divine!
    Not a grave to show thereby,
    '_Here these grey old gods do lie,_'
          Pan, Pan is dead."

        E. B. Browning.

Pan is dead. In the old Hellenistic sense Pan is gone forever. Yet
until Nature has ceased to be, the thing we call Pan must remain a
living entity. Some there be who call his music, when he makes all
humanity dance to his piping, "_Joie de vivre_," and De Musset speaks
of "_Le vin de la jeunesse_" which ferments "_dans les veines de
Dieu_." It is Pan who inspires Seumas, the old islander, of whom Fiona
Macleod writes, and who, looking towards the sea at sunrise, says,
"Every morning like this I take my hat off to the beauty of the
world."

Half of the flesh and half of the spirit is Pan. There are some who
have never come into contact with him, who know him only as the emblem
of Paganism, a cruel thing, more beast than man, trampling, with
goat's feet, on the gentlest flowers of spring. They know not the
meaning of "the Green Fire of Life," nor have they ever known Pan's
moods of tender sadness. Never to them has come in the forest, where
the great grey trunks of the beeches rise from a carpet of primroses
and blue hyacinths, and the slender silver beeches are the guardian
angels of the starry wood-anemones, and the sunbeams slant through the
oak and beech leaves of tender green and play on the dead amber leaves
of a year that is gone, the whisper of little feet that cannot be
seen, the piercing sweet music from very far away, that fills the
heart with gladness and yet with a strange pain--the ache of the
_Weltschmerz_--the echo of the pipes of Pan.

    "... Oftenest in the dark woods I hear him sing
    Dim, half-remembered things, where the old mosses cling
    To the old trees, and the faint wandering eddies bring
    The phantom echoes of a phantom spring."

        Fiona Macleod.




LORELEI

    "Ich weiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten,
    Dass ich so traurig bin;
    Ein Märchen aus alten Zeiten,
    Das kommt mir nicht aus dem Sinn.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Die schönste Jungfrau sitzet
    Dort oben wunderbar,
    Ihr gold'nes Geschmeide blitzet,
    Sie kämmt ihr gold'nes Haar.

    Sie kämmt es mit gold'nem Kamme,
    Und singt ein Lied dabei;
    Das hat eine wundersame,
    Gewaltige Melodei."

        Heine.


In every land, North and South, East and West, from sea to sea, myth
and legend hand down to us as cruel and malignant creatures, who
ceaselessly seek to slay man's body and to destroy his soul, the
half-human children of the restless sea and of the fiercely running
streams.

In Scotland and in Australia, in every part of Europe, we have tales
of horrible formless things which frequent lonely rivers and lochs and
marshes, and to meet which must mean Death. And equal in malignity
with them, and infinitely more dangerous, are the beautiful beings who
would seem to claim descent from Lilith, the soulless wife of Adam.

Such were the sirens who would have compassed the destruction of
Odysseus. Such are the mermaids, to wed with one of whom must bring
unutterable woe upon any of the sons of men. In lonely far-off places
by the sea there still are tales of exquisite melodies heard in the
gloaming, or at night when the moon makes a silver pathway across the
water; still are there stories of women whose home is in the depths of
the ocean, and who come to charm away men's souls by their beauty and
by their pitiful longing for human love.

Those who have looked on the yellow-green waters of the Seine, or who
have seen the more turbid, more powerful Thames sweeping her serious,
majestic way down towards the open ocean, at Westminster, or at London
Bridge, can perhaps realise something of that inwardness of things
that made the people of the past, and that makes the mentally
uncontrolled people of the present, feel a fateful power calling upon
them to listen to the insistence of the exacting waters, and to
surrender their lives and their souls forever to a thing that called
and which would brook no denial. In the Morgue, or in a mortuary by
the river-side, their poor bodies have lain when the rivers have
worked their will with them, and "Suicide," "Death by drowning," or
"By Misadventure" have been the verdicts given. We live in a too
practical, too utterly common-sensical age to conceive a poor woman
with nothing on earth left to live for, being lured down to the Shades
by a creature of the water, or a man who longs for death seeing a
beautiful daughter of a river-god beckoning to him to come where he
will find peace everlasting.

Yet ever we war with the sea. All of us know her seductive charm, but
all of us fear her. The boundary line between our fear of the fierce,
remorseless, ever-seeking, cruel waves that lap up life swiftly as a
thirsty beast laps water, and the old belief in cruel sea-creatures
that sought constantly for the human things that were to be their
prey, is a very narrow one. And once we have seen the sea in a rage,
flinging herself in terrible anger against the poor, frail toy that
the hands of men have made and that was intended to rule and to resist
her, foaming and frothing over the decks of the thing that carries
human lives, we can understand much of the old pagan belief. If one
has watched a river in spate, red as with blood, rushing triumphantly
over all resistance, smashing down the trees that baulk it, sweeping
away each poor, helpless thing, brute or human, that it encounters,
dealing out ruin and death, and proceeding superbly on to carry its
trophies of disaster to the bosom of the Ocean Mother, very easy is it
to see from whence came those old tales of cruelty, of irresistible
strength, of desire.

Many are the tales of sea-maidens who have stolen men's lives from
them and sent their bodies to move up and down amidst the wrack, like
broken toys with which a child has grown tired of playing and cast
away in weariness. In an eighth-century chronicle concerning St.
Fechin, we read of evil powers whose rage is "seen in that watery fury
and their hellish hate and turbulence in the beating of the sea
against the rocks." "The bitter gifts of our lord Poseidon" is the
name given to them by one of the earliest poets of Greece[7] and a
poet of our own time--poet of the sea, of running water, and of lonely
places--quotes from the saying of a fisherman of the isle of Ulva
words that show why simple minds have so many times materialised the
restless, devouring element into the form of a woman who is very
beautiful, but whose tender mercies are very cruel. "She is like a
woman of the old tales whose beauty is dreadful," said Seumas, the
islander, "and who breaks your heart at last whether she smiles or
frowns. But she doesn't care about that, or whether you are hurt or
not. It's because she has no heart, being all a wild water."[8]

Treacherous, beautiful, remorseless, that is how men regard the sea
and the rushing rivers, of whom the sirens and mermaids of old
tradition have come to stand as symbols. Treacherous and pitiless, yet
with a fascination that can draw even the moon and the stars to her
breast:

    "Once I sat upon a promontory,
    And heard a mermaid, on a dolphin's back,
    Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath,
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song;
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,
    To hear the sea-maid's music."

        Shakespeare.

Very many are the stories of the women of the sea and of the rivers,
but that one who must forever hold her own, because Heine has
immortalised her in song, is the river maiden of the Rhine--the
Lorelei.

Near St. Goar, there rises out of the waters of the Rhine a
perpendicular rock, some four hundred feet high. Many a boatman in
bygone days there met his death, and the echo which it possesses is
still a mournful one. Those who know the great river, under which lies
hid the treasure of the Nibelungs, with its "gleaming towns by the
river-side and the green vineyards combed along the hills," and who
have felt the romance of the rugged crags, crowned by ruined castles,
that stand like fantastic and very ancient sentries to guard its
channel, can well understand how easy of belief was the legend of the
Lorelei.

Down the green waters came the boatman's frail craft, ever drawing
nearer to the perilous rock. All his care and all his skill were
required to avert a very visible danger. But high above him, from the
rock round which the swirling eddies splashed and foamed, there came a
voice.

    "Her voice was like the voice the stars
    Had when they sang together."

And when the boatman looked up at the sound of such sweet music, he
beheld a maiden more fair than any he had ever dreamed of. On the rock
she sat, combing her long golden hair with a comb of red gold. Her
limbs were white as foam and her eyes green like the emerald green of
the rushing river. And her red lips smiled on him and her arms were
held out to him in welcome, and the sound of her song thrilled through
the heart of him who listened, and her eyes drew his soul to her arms.

Forgotten was all peril. The rushing stream seized the little boat
and did with it as it willed. And while the boatman still gazed
upwards, intoxicated by her matchless beauty and the magic of her
voice, his boat was swept against the rock, and, with the jar and
crash, knowledge came back to him, and he heard, with broken heart,
the mocking laughter of the Lorelei as he was dragged down as if by a
thousand icy hands, and, with a choking sigh, surrendered his life to
the pitiless river.

To one man only was it granted to see the siren so near that he could
hold her little, cold, white hands, and feel the wondrous golden hair
sweep across his eyes. This was a young fisherman, who met her by the
river and listened to the entrancing songs that she sang for him
alone. Each evening she would tell him where to cast his nets on the
morrow, and he prospered greatly and was a marvel to all others who
fished in the waters of the Rhine. But there came an evening when he
was seen joyously hastening down the river bank in response to the
voice of the Lorelei, that surely never had sounded so honey-sweet
before, and he came back nevermore. They said that the Lorelei had
dragged him down to her coral caves that he might live with her there
forever, and, if it were not so, the rushing water could never whisper
her secret and theirs, of a lifeless plaything that they swept
seawards, and that wore a look of horror and of great wonder in its
dead, wide-open eyes.

It is "ein Märchen aus alten Zeiten"--a legend of long ago.

But it is a very much older _Märchen_ that tells us of the warning of
Circe to Odysseus:

"To the Sirens first shalt thou come, who bewitch all men, whosoever
shall come to them. Whoso draws nigh them unwittingly and hears the
sound of the Siren's voice, never doth he see wife or babes stand by
him on his return, nor have they joy at his coming; but the Sirens
enchant him with their clear song."

And until there shall be no more sea and the rivers have ceased to
run, the enchantment that comes from the call of the water to the
hearts of men must go on. Day by day the toll of lives is paid, and
still the cruel daughters of the deep remain unsatisfied. We can hear
their hungry whimper from the rushing river through the night, and the
waves of the sea that thunders along the coast would seem to voice the
insistence of their desire. And we who listen to their ceaseless,
restless moan can say with Heine:

    "_Ich weiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten,_
    _Dass ich so traurig bin._"

For the sadness of heart, the melancholy that their music brings us is
a mystery which none on this earth may ever unravel.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] Archilochus of Paros.

[8] Fiona Macleod (_The Winged Destiny_).




FREYA, QUEEN OF THE NORTHERN GODS


"Friday's bairn is loving and giving," says the old rhyme that sets
forth the special qualities of the children born on each day of the
week, and to the superstitious who regard Friday as a day of evil
omen, it seems strange that Friday's bairn should be so blessed. But
they forget that before Christianity swept paganism before it, and
taught those who worshipped the northern gods the story of that first
black "Good Friday," the tragedy in which all humanity was involved,
Friday was the day of Freya, "The Beloved," gentle protectress, and
most generous giver of all joys, delights, and pleasures. From her, in
mediæval times, the high-born women who acted as dispensers to their
lords first took the title _Frouwa_ (=Frau), and when, in its
transition stage, the old heathenism had evolved into a religion of
strong nature worship, overshadowed by fatalism, only thinly veneered
by Christianity, the minds of the Christian converts of Scandinavia,
like those of puzzled children, transferred to the Virgin Mary the
attributes that had formerly been those of their "Lady"--Freya, the
goddess of Love.

Long before the Madonna was worshipped, Freya gave her name to plants,
to flowers, and even to insects, and the child who says to the
beautiful little insect, that he finds on a leaf, "Ladybird, ladybird,
fly away home," is commemorating the name of the Lady, Freya, to whom
his ancestors offered their prayers.

In her home in the Hall of Mists, Freya (or Frigga), wife of Odin the
All Father, sat with her golden distaff spinning the clouds. Orion's
Belt was known as "Frigga's spindle" by the Norsemen, and the men on
the earth, as they watched the great cumulous masses of snowy-white,
golden or silver edged, the fleecy cloudlets of grey, soft as the
feathers on the breast of a dove, or the angry banks of black and
purple, portending a storm, had constant proof of the diligence of
their goddess. She was the protectress of those who sailed the seas,
and the care of children as they came into the world was also hers.
Hers, too, was the happy task of bringing together after death, lovers
whom Death had parted, and to her belonged the glorious task of going
down to the fields of battle where the slain lay strewn like leaves in
autumn and leading to Valhalla the half of the warriors who, as
heroes, had died. Her vision enabled her to look over all the earth,
and she could see into the Future, but she held her knowledge as a
profound secret that none could prevail upon her to betray.

    "Of me the gods are sprung;
    And all that is to come I know, but lock
    In my own breast, and have to none reveal'd."

        Matthew Arnold.

[Illustration: FREYA SAT SPINNING THE CLOUDS]

Thus she came to be pictured crowned with heron plumes, the symbol of
silence--the silence of the lonely marshes where the heron stands in
mutest contemplation--a tall, very stately, very queenly, wholly
beautiful woman, with a bunch of keys at her girdle--symbol of her
protection of the Northern housewife--sometimes clad in snow-white
robes, sometimes in robes of sombre black. And because her care was
for the anxious, weary housewife, for the mother and her new-born
babe, for the storm-tossed mariner, fighting the billows of a hungry
sea, for those whose true and pure love had suffered the crucifixion
of death, and for the glorious dead on the field of battle, it is very
easy to see Freya as her worshippers saw her--an ideal of perfect
womanhood.

But the gods of the Norsemen were never wholly gods. Always they, like
the gods of Greece, endeared themselves to humanity by possessing some
little, or big, human weakness. And Freya is none the less lovable to
the descendants of her worshippers because she possessed the so-called
"feminine weakness" of love of dress. Jewels, too, she loved, and
knowing the wondrous skill of the dwarfs in fashioning exquisite
ornaments, she broke off a piece of gold from the statue of Odin, her
husband, and gave it to them to make into a necklace--the marvellous
jewelled necklace Brisingamen, that in time to come was possessed by
Beowulf. It was so exquisite a thing that it made her beauty twice
more perfect, and Odin loved her doubly much because of it. But when
he discovered that his statue had been tampered with, his wrath was
very great, and furiously he summoned the dwarfs--they who dealt
always with fine metal--and demanded of them which of them had done
him this grievous wrong. But the dwarfs loved Freya, and from them he
got no answer.

Then he placed the statue above the temple gate, and laboured with
guile to devise runes that might give it the power of speech, so that
it might shout aloud the name of the impious robber as the robber went
by. Freya, no longer an omnipotent goddess, but a frightened wife,
trembled before his wrath, and begged the dwarfs to help her. And when
one of them--the most hideous of all--promised that he would prevent
the statue from speaking if Freya would but deign to smile upon him,
the queen of the gods, who had no dread of ugly things, and whose
heart was full of love and of pity, smiled her gentle smile on the
piteous little creature who had never known looks of anything but
horror and disgust from any of the deathless gods. It was for him a
wondrous moment, and the payment was worth Death itself. That night a
deep sleep fell on the guards of Odin's statue, and, while they slept,
the statue was pulled down from its pedestal and smashed into pieces.
The dwarf had fulfilled his part of the bargain.

When Odin next morning discovered the sacrilege, great was his anger,
and when no inquiry could find for him the criminal, he quitted Asgard
in furious wrath. For seven months he stayed away, and in that time
the Ice Giants invaded his realm, and all the land was covered with a
pall of snow, viciously pinched by black frosts, chilled by clinging,
deadening, impenetrable mists. But at the end of seven dreary months
Odin returned, and with him came the blessings of light and of
sunshine, and the Ice Giants in terror fled away.

Well was it for woman or for warrior to gain the favour of Freya, the
Beloved, who knew how to rule even Odin, the All Father, himself. The
Winilers who were warring with the Vandals once sought her aid, and
gained her promise of help. From Hlidskialf, the mighty watch-tower,
highest point in Asgard, from whence Odin and his queen could look
down and behold what was happening all the world over, amongst gods
and men, dwarfs, elves, and giants, and all creatures of their
kingdom, Freya watched the Vandals and the Winilers making ready for
the battle which was to decide forever which people should rule the
other.

Night was descending, but in the evening light the two gods beheld the
glitter of spears, the gleam of brass helmets and of swords, and heard
from afar the hoarse shouts of the warriors as they made ready for the
great fight on the morrow. Knowing well that her lord favoured the
Vandals, Freya asked him to tell her which army was to gain the
victory. "The army upon which my eyes shall first rest when I awake at
the dawning," said Odin, full well knowing that his couch was so
placed that he could not fail to see the Vandals when he woke. Well
pleased with his own astuteness, he then retired to rest, and soon
sleep lay heavy on his eyelids. But, while he slept, Freya gently
moved the couch upon which he lay, so that he must open his eyes not
on the army who had won his favour, but on the army that owned hers.
To the Winilers, she gave command to dress up their women as men, and
let them meet the gaze of Odin in the dawning, in full battle array.

    "Take thou thy women-folk,
    Maidens and wives;
    Over your ankles
    Lace on the white war-hose;
    Over your bosoms
    Link up the hard mail-nets;
    Over your lips
    Plait long tresses with cunning;--
    So war beasts full-bearded
    King Odin shall deem you,
    When off the grey sea-beach
    At sunrise ye greet him."

        Charles Kingsley.

When the sun sent its first pale green light next morning over grey
sky and sea, Odin awoke, and gazed from his watch-tower at the army on
the beach. And, with great amazement, "What Longbeards are those?" he
cried.

"They are Winilers!" said Freya, in joyous triumph, "but you have
given them a new name. Now must you also give them a gift! Let it be
the victory, I pray you, dear lord of mine."

And Odin, seeing himself outwitted and knowing that honour bade him
follow the Northern custom and give the people he had named a gift,
bestowed on the Longbeards and their men the victory that Freya
craved. Nor was the gift of Odin one for that day alone, for to him
the _Langobarden_ attributed the many victories that led them at last
to find a home in the sunny land of Italy, where beautiful Lombardy
still commemorates by its name the stratagem of Freya, the queen.

With the coming of Christianity, Freya, the Beloved, was cast out
along with all the other old forgotten gods. The people who had loved
and worshipped her were taught that she was an evil thing and that to
worship her was sin. Thus she was banished to the lonely peaks of the
mountains of Norway and of Sweden and to the Brocken in Germany, no
longer a goddess to be loved, but transformed into a malignant power,
full of horror and of wickedness. On Walpurgis Night she led the
witches' revels on the Brocken, and the cats who were said to draw her
car while still she was regarded as a beneficent protectress of the
weak and needy, ceased to be the gentle creatures of Freya the Good,
and came under the ban of religion as the satanic companions of
witches by habit and repute.

One gentle thing only was her memory allowed to keep. When, not as an
omnipotent goddess but as a heart-broken mother, she wept the death of
her dearly-loved son, Baldur the Beautiful, the tears that she shed
were turned, as they fell, into pure gold that is found in the beds of
lonely mountain streams. And we who claim descent from the peoples who
worshipped her--

    "Saxon and Norman and Dane are we"--

can surely cleanse her memory from all the ugly impurities of
superstition and remember only the pure gold of the fact that our
warrior ancestors did not only pray to a fierce and mighty god of
battles, but to a woman who was "loving and giving"--the little
child's deification of the mother whom it loves and who holds it very
dear.




THE DEATH OF BALDUR

    "I heard a voice, that cried,
    'Baldur the Beautiful
    Is dead, is dead!'
    And through the misty air
    Passed like the mournful cry
    Of sunward sailing cranes."

        Longfellow.


Among the gods of Greece we find gods and goddesses who do unworthy
deeds, but none to act the permanent part of villain of the play. In
the mythology of the Norsemen we have a god who is wholly treacherous
and evil, ever the villain of the piece, cunning, malicious,
vindictive, and cruel--the god Loki. And as his foil, and his victim,
we have Baldur, best of all gods, most beautiful, most greatly
beloved. Baldur was the Galahad of the court of Odin the king, his
father.

    "My strength is of the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure."

No impure thing was to be found in his dwelling; none could impugn his
courage, yet ever he counselled peace, ever was gentle and infinitely
wise, and his beauty was as the beauty of the whitest of all the
flowers of the Northland, called after him _Baldrsbrá_. The god of the
Norsemen was essentially a god of battles, and we are told by great
authorities that Baldur was originally a hero who fought on the
earth, and who, in time, came to be deified. Even if it be so, it is
good to think that a race of warriors could worship one whose chief
qualities were wisdom, purity, and love.

In perfect happiness, loving and beloved, Baldur lived in Asgard with
his wife Nanna, until a night when his sleep was assailed by horrible
dreams of evil omen. In the morning he told the gods that he had
dreamed that Death, a thing till then unknown in Asgard, had come and
cruelly taken his life away. Solemnly the gods debated how this ill
happening might be averted, and Freya, his mother, fear for her best
beloved hanging heavy over her heart, took upon herself the task of
laying under oath fire and water, iron and all other metals, trees and
shrubs, birds, beasts and creeping things, to do no harm to Baldur.
With eager haste she went from place to place, nor did she fail to
exact the oath from anything in all nature, animate or inanimate, save
one only.

"A twig of mistletoe, tender and fair, grew high above the field," and
such a little thing it was, with its dainty green leaves and waxen
white berries, nestling for protection under the strong arm of a great
oak, that the goddess passed it by. Assuredly no scathe could come to
Baldur the Beautiful from a creature so insignificant, and Freya
returned to Asgard well pleased with her quest.

Then indeed was there joy and laughter amongst the gods, for each one
tried how he might slay Baldur, but neither sword nor stone, hammer
nor battle-axe could work him any ill.

Odin alone remained unsatisfied. Mounted on his eight-footed grey
steed, Sleipnir, he galloped off in haste to consult the giant
prophetess Angrbotha, who was dead and had to be followed to Niflheim,
the chilly underworld that lies far north from the world of men, and
where the sun never comes. Hel, the daughter of Loki and of Angrbotha,
was queen of this dark domain.

    "There, in a bitterly cold place, she received the souls
    of all who died of sickness or old age; care was her
    bed, hunger her dish, starvation her knife. Her walls
    were high and strong, and her bolts and bars huge; 'Half
    blue was her skin, and half the colour of human flesh. A
    goddess easy to know, and in all things very stern and
    grim.'"

        Dasent.

In her kingdom no soul that passed away in glorious battle was
received, nor any that fought out the last of life in a fierce combat
with the angry waves of the sea. Only those who died ingloriously were
her guests.

When he had reached the realm of Hel, Odin found that a feast was
being prepared, and the couches were spread, as for an honoured guest,
with rich tapestry and with gold. For many a year had Angrbotha rested
there in peace, and it was only by chanting a magic spell and tracing
those runes which have power to raise the dead that Odin awoke her.
When she raised herself, terrible and angry from her tomb, he did not
tell her that he was the mighty father of gods and men. He only asked
her for whom the great feast was prepared, and why Hel was spreading
her couches so gorgeously. And to the father of Baldur she revealed
the secret of the future, that Baldur was the expected guest, and that
by his blind brother Hodur his soul was to be hastened to the Shades.

"Who, then, would avenge him?" asked the father, great wrath in his
heart. And the prophetess replied that his death should be avenged by
Vali, his youngest brother, who should not wash his hands nor comb his
hair until he had brought the slayer of Baldur to the funeral pyre.
But yet another question Odin would fain have answered.

"_Who_," he asked, "_would refuse to weep at Baldur's death?_"

Thereat the prophetess, knowing that her questioner could be none
other than Odin, for to no mortal man could be known so much of the
future, refused for evermore to speak, and returned to the silence of
her tomb. And Odin was forced to mount his steed and to return to his
own land of warmth and pleasure.

On his return he found that all was well with Baldur. Thus he tried to
still his anxious heart and to forget the feast in the chill regions
of Niflheim, spread for the son who was to him the dearest, and to
laugh with those who tried in vain to bring scathe to Baldur.

Only one among those who looked at those sports and grew merry, as he
whom they loved stood like a great cliff against which the devouring
waves of the fierce North Sea beat and foam and crash in vain, had
malice in his heart as he beheld the wonder. In the evil heart of Loki
there came a desire to overthrow the god who was beloved by all gods
and by all men. He hated him because he was pure, and the mind of Loki
was as a stream into which all the filth of the world is discharged.
He hated him because Baldur was truth and loyalty, and he, Loki, was
treachery and dishonour. He hated him because to Loki there came never
a thought that was not full of meanness and greed and cruelty and
vice, and Baldur was indeed one _sans peur et sans reproche_.

Thus Loki, taking upon himself the form of a woman, went to Fensalir,
the palace, all silver and gold, where dwelt Freya, the mother of
Baldur.

The goddess sat, in happy majesty, spinning the clouds, and when Loki,
apparently a gentle old woman, passed by where she sat, and then
paused and asked, as if amazed, what were the shouts of merriment that
she heard, the smiling goddess replied:

"All things on earth have sworn to me never to injure Baldur, and all
the gods use their weapons against him in vain. Baldur is safe for
evermore."

"All things?" queried Loki.

And Freya answered, "All things but the mistletoe. No harm can come to
him from a thing so weak that it only lives by the lives of others."

Then the vicious heart of Loki grew joyous. Quickly he went to where
the mistletoe grew, cut a slender green branch, shaped it into a
point, and sought the blind god Hodur.

Hodur stood aside, while the other gods merrily pursued their sport.

"Why dost thou not take aim at Baldur with a weapon that fails and so
join in the laughter?" asked Loki.

And Hodur sadly made answer:

"Well dost thou know that darkness is my lot, nor have I ought to
cast at my brother."

Then Loki placed in his hand the shaft of mistletoe and guided his
aim, and well and surely Hodur cast the dart. He waited, then, for the
merry laughter that followed ever on the onslaught of those against
him whom none could do harm. But a great and terrible cry smote his
ears. "_Baldur the Beautiful is dead! is dead!_"

On the ground lay Baldur, a white flower cut down by the scythe of the
mower. And all through the realm of the gods, and all through the land
of the Northmen there arose a cry of bitter lamentation.

"That was the greatest woe that ever befell gods and men," says the
story.

The sound of terrible mourning in place of laughter brought Freya to
where

    "on the floor lay Baldur dead; and round lay thickly
    strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears, which all the
    gods in sport had lightly thrown at Baldur, whom no
    weapon pierced or clove; but in his breast stood fixed
    the fatal bough of mistletoe."

        Matthew Arnold.

When she saw what had befallen him, Freya's grief was a grief that
refused to be comforted, but when the gods, overwhelmed with sorrow,
knew not what course to take, she quickly commanded that one should
ride to Niflheim and offer Hel a ransom if she would permit Baldur to
return to Asgard.

Hermoder the Nimble, another of the sons of Odin, undertook the
mission, and, mounted on his father's eight-footed steed, he speedily
reached the ice-cold domain of Hel.

There he found Baldur, sitting on the noblest seat of those who
feasted, ruling among the people of the Underworld. With burning words
Hermoder pled with Hel that she would permit Baldur to return to the
world of gods and the world of men, by both of whom he was so dearly
beloved. Said Hel:

    "Come then! if Baldur was so dear beloved,
    And this is true, and such a loss is Heaven's--
    Hear, how to Heaven may Baldur be restored.
    Show me through all the world the signs of grief!
    Fails but one thing to grieve, here Baldur stops!
    Let all that lives and moves upon the earth
    Weep him, and all that is without life weep;
    Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones,
    So shall I know the loss was dear indeed,
    And bend my heart, and give him back to Heaven."

        Matthew Arnold.

Gladly Hermoder made answer:

"All things shall weep for Baldur!"

Swiftly he made his perilous return journey, and at once, when the
gods heard what Hel had said, messengers were despatched all over the
earth to beg all things, living and dead, to weep for Baldur, and so
dear to all nature was the beautiful god, that the messengers
everywhere left behind them a track of the tears that they caused to
be shed.

Meantime, in Asgard, preparations were made for Baldur's pyre. The
longest of the pines in the forest were cut down by the gods, and
piled up in a mighty pyre on the deck of his great ship _Ringhorn_,
the largest in the world.

[Illustration: "BALDUR THE BEAUTIFUL IS DEAD"]

    "Seventy ells and four extended
    On the grass the vessel's keel;
    High above it, gilt and splendid,
    Rose the figure-head ferocious
    With its crest of steel."

        Longfellow.

Down to the seashore they bore the body, and laid it on the pyre with
rich gifts all round it, and the pine trunks of the Northern forests
that formed the pyre, they covered with gorgeous tapestries and
fragrant flowers. And when they had laid him there, with all love and
gentleness, and his fair young wife, Nanna, looked on his beautiful
still face, sorrow smote her heart so that it was broken, and she fell
down dead. Tenderly they laid her beside him, and by him, too, they
laid the bodies of his horse and his hounds, which they slew to bear
their master company in the land whither his soul had fled; and around
the pyre they twined thorns, the emblem of sleep.

Yet even then they looked for his speedy return, radiant and glad to
come home to a sunlit land of happiness. And when the messengers who
were to have brought tidings of his freedom were seen drawing near,
eagerly they crowded to hear the glad words, "_All creatures weep, and
Baldur shall return!_"

But with them they brought not hope, but despair. All things, living
and dead, had wept, save one only. A giantess who sat in a dark cave
had laughed them to scorn. With devilish merriment she mocked:

    "Neither in life, nor yet in death,
    Gave he me gladness.
    Let Hel keep her prey."

Then all knew that yet a second time had Baldur been betrayed, and
that the giantess was none other than Loki, and Loki, realising the
fierce wrath of Odin and of the other gods, fled before them, yet
could not escape his doom. And grief unspeakable was that of gods and
of men when they knew that in the chill realm of the inglorious dead
Baldur must remain until the twilight of the gods had come, until old
things had passed away, and all things had become new.

Not only the gods, but the giants of the storm and frost, and the
frost elves came to behold the last of him whom they loved. Then the
pyre was set alight, and the great vessel was launched, and glided out
to sea with its sails of flame.

    "They launched the burning ship!
    It floated far away
    Over the misty sea,
    Till like the sun it seemed,
    Sinking beneath the waves,
    Baldur returned no more!"

Yet, ere he parted from his dead son, Odin stooped over him and
whispered a word in his ear. And there are those who say that as the
gods in infinite sorrow stood on the beach staring out to sea,
darkness fell, and only a fiery track on the waves showed whither he
had gone whose passing had robbed Asgard and the Earth of their most
beautiful thing, heavy as the weight of chill Death's remorseless hand
would have been their hearts, but for the knowledge of that word. They
knew that with the death of Baldur the twilight of the gods had begun,
and that by much strife and infinite suffering down through the ages
the work of their purification and hallowing must be wrought. But when
all were fit to receive him, and peace and happiness reigned again on
earth and in heaven, Baldur would come back. For the word was
_Resurrection_.

    "So perish the old Gods!
    But out of the sea of time
    Rises a new land of song,
    Fairer than the old."

        Longfellow.

    "Heartily know,
    When half-gods go,
    The gods arrive."

        Emerson.




BEOWULF

    "He was of mankind
    In might the strongest."

        Longfellow's Translation.


Whether those who read it be scholars who would argue about the origin
and date of the poem, ingenious theorists who would fain use all the
fragmentary tales and rhymes of the nursery as parts of a vast jig-saw
puzzle of nature myths, or merely simple folk who read a tale for a
tale's sake, every reader of the poem of Beowulf must own that it is
one of the finest stories ever written.

It is "the most ancient heroic poem in the Germanic language," and was
brought to Britain by the "Wingèd Hats" who sailed across the grey
North Sea to conquer and to help to weld that great amalgam of peoples
into what is now the British Race.

But once it had arrived in England, the legend was put into a dress
that the British-born could more readily appreciate. In all
probability the scene of the story was a corner of that island of
Saeland upon which Copenhagen now stands, but he who wrote down the
poem for his countrymen and who wrote it in the pure literary
Anglo-Saxon of Wessex, painted the scenery from the places that he and
his readers knew best. And if you should walk along the breezy,
magnificent, rugged Yorkshire coast for twelve miles, from Whitby
northward to the top of Bowlby Cliff, you would find it quite easy to
believe that it was there amongst the high sea-cliffs that Beowulf
and his hearth-sharers once lived, and there, on the highest ness of
our eastern coast, under a great barrow, that Beowulf was buried.
_Beowulfesby_--_Bowlby_ seems a quite easy transition. But the people
of our island race have undoubtedly a gift for seizing the imports of
other lands and hall-marking them as their own, and, in all
probability, the Beowulf of the heroic poem was one who lived and died
in the land of Scandinavia.

In Denmark, so goes the story, when the people were longing for a
king, to their shores there drifted, on a day when the white birds
were screaming over the sea-tangle and wreckage that a stormy sea, now
sinking to rest, was sweeping up on the shore, a little boat in which,
on a sheaf of ripe wheat and surrounded by priceless weapons and
jewels, there lay a most beautiful babe, who smiled in his sleep. That
he was the son of Odin they had no doubt, and they made him their
king, and served him faithfully and loyally for the rest of his life.

A worthy and a noble king was King Scyld Scefing, a ruler on land and
on the sea, of which even as an infant he had had no fear. But when
many years had come and gone, and when Scyld Scefing felt that death
drew near, he called his nobles to him and told them in what manner he
fain would pass. So they did as he said, and in a ship they built a
funeral pyre, and round it placed much gold and jewels, and on it laid
a sheaf of wheat. Then with very great pain and labour, for he was old
and Death's hand lay heavy upon him, the king climbed into the ship
and stretched out his limbs on the pyre, and said farewell to all his
faithful people. And the ship drifted out with the tide, and the
hearts of the watchers were heavy as they saw the sails of the vessel
that bore him vanish into the grey, and knew that their king had gone
back to the place from whence he came, and that they should look on
his face no more.

Behind him Scyld left descendants, and one after the other reigned
over Denmark. It was in the reign of his great-grandson, Hrothgar,
that there took place those things that are told in the story of
Beowulf.

A mighty king and warrior was Hrothgar, and far across the northern
seas his fame spread wide, so that all the warriors of the land that
he ruled were proud to serve under him in peace, and in war to die for
him. During his long life he and his men never went forth in their
black-prowed ships without returning with the joyous shouts of the
victor, with for cargo the rich spoil they had won from their enemies.
As he grew old, Hrothgar determined to raise for himself a mighty
monument to the magnificence of his reign, and so there was builded
for him a vast hall with majestic towers and lofty pinnacles--the
finest banqueting-hall that his skilled artificers could dream of. And
when at length the hall was completed, Hrothgar gave a feast to all
his thanes, and for days and for nights on end the great rafters of
Heorot--as his palace was named--echoed the shouts and laughter of the
mighty warriors, and the music of the minstrels and the songs that
they sang. A proud man was Hrothgar on the night that the banquet was
ended amidst the acclamations of his people, and a proud and happy man
he lay down to rest, while his bodyguard of mighty warriors stretched
themselves on the rush-strewn floor of the great room where they had
feasted, and deeply slumbered there.

Now, in the dark fens of that land there dwelt a monster--fierce,
noisome, and cruel, a thing that loved evil and hated all that was
joyous and good. To its ears came the ring of the laughter and the
shouts of King Hrothgar's revellers, and the sweet song of the gleemen
and the melody of harps filled it with fierce hatred. From its wallow
in the marshes, where the pestilent grey fog hung round its dwelling,
the monster, known to all men as the Grendel, came forth, to kill and
to devour. Through the dark night, across the lonely moorland, it made
its way, and the birds of the moor flew screaming in terror before it,
and the wild creatures of the desolate country over which it padded
clapped down in their coverts and trembled as it passed. It came at
length to the great hall where

    "A fair troop of warrior thanes guarding it found he;
    Heedlessly sleeping, they recked not of sorrow."

Never a thought did they give to the Grendel,--

    "A haunter of marshes, a holder of moors,
                                ... Secret
    The land he inhabits; dark, wolf-haunted ways
    Of the windy hillside, by the treacherous tarn;
    Or where, covered up in its mist, the hill stream
    Downward flows."

Soundly slept Hrothgar, nor opened eye until, in the bright light of
the morning, he was roused by terrified servants, forgetful of his
august royalty, impelled by terror, crying aloud their terrible tale.
They had come, they said, to lay on the floor of the banqueting-hall,
sweet, fresh rushes from the meadows, and to clear away all trace of
the feasting overnight. But the two-and-thirty knights who, in full
armour, had lain down to sleep were all gone, and on the floor was
the spoor of something foul and noisome, and on the walls and on the
trampled rushes were great and terrible smears of human blood.

They tracked the Grendel back to the marsh from whence he had come,
and shuddered at the sight of bestial footprints that left
blood-stains behind.

Terrible indeed was the grief of Hrothgar, but still more terrible was
his anger. He offered a royal reward to any man who would slay the
Grendel, and full gladly ten of his warriors pledged themselves to
sleep that night in the great hall and to slay the Grendel ere morning
came.

But dawn showed once more a piteous sight. Again there were only
trampled and blood-stained rushes, with the loathsome smell of unclean
flesh. Again the foul tracks of the monster were found where it had
padded softly back to its noisome fens.

There were many brave men in the kingdom of Hrothgar the Dane, and yet
again did they strive to maintain the dignity of the great hall,
Heorot, and to uphold the honour of their king. But through twelve
dismal years the Grendel took its toll of the bravest in the realm,
and to sleep in the place that Hrothgar had built as monument to his
magnificent supremacy, ever meant, for the sleeper, shameful death.
Well content was the Grendel, that grew fat and lusty amongst the grey
mists of the black marshes, unknowing that in the land of the Goths
there was growing to manhood one whose feet already should be echoing
along that path from which Death was to come.

In the realm of the Goths, Hygelac was king, and no greater hero
lived in his kingdom than Beowulf, his own sister's son. From the age
of seven Beowulf was brought up at the court of his uncle.

A great, fair, blue-eyed lad was Beowulf, lazy, and very slow to
wrath. When he had at last become a yellow-haired giant, of wondrous
good-temper, and leisurely in movement, the other young warriors of
Gothland had mocked at him as at one who was only a very huge, very
amiable child. But, like others of the same descent, Beowulf's anger,
if slow to kindle, was a terrible fire once it began to flame. A few
of those flares-up had shown the folk of his uncle's kingdom that no
mean nor evil deed might lightly be done, nor evil word spoken in the
presence of Beowulf. In battle against the Swedes, no sword had hewn
down more men than the sword of Beowulf. And when the champion swimmer
of the land of the Goths challenged the young giant Beowulf to swim a
match with him, for five whole days they swam together. A tempest
driving down from the twilight land of the ice and snow parted them
then, and he who had been champion was driven ashore and thankfully
struggled on to the beach of his own dear country once again. But the
foaming seas cast Beowulf on some jagged cliffs, and would fain have
battered his body into broken fragments against them, and as he fought
and struggled to resist their raging cruelty, mermaids and nixies and
many monsters of the deep joined forces with the waves and strove to
wrest his life from him. And while with one hand he held on to a sharp
rock, with the other he dealt with his sword stark blows on those
children of the deep who would fain have devoured him. Their bodies,
deep-gashed and dead, floated down to the coast of Gothland, and the
king and all those who looked for the corpse of Beowulf saw them,
amazed. Then at length came Beowulf himself, and with great gladness
was he welcomed, and the king, his uncle, gave him his treasured
sword, Nägeling, in token of his valour.

In the court of Hrothgar, the number of brave warriors ever grew
smaller. One man only had witnessed the terrible slaughter of one of
those black nights and yet had kept his life. He was a bard--a
scald--and from the land where he had seen such grim horror, he fled
to the land of the Goths, and there, in the court of the king, he sang
the gloomy tale of the never-ending slaughter of noble warriors by the
foul Grendel of the fens and moors.

Beowulf listened, enthralled, to his song. But those who knew him saw
his eyes gleam as the good steel blade of a sword gleams when it is
drawn for battle, and when he asked his uncle to allow him to go to
the land of the Danes and slay this filthy thing, his uncle smiled,
with no surprise, and was very well content.

So it came to pass that Beowulf, in his black-prowed ship, with
fourteen trusty followers, set sail from Gothland for the kingdom of
Hrothgar.

The warden of the Danish coast was riding his rounds one morning when
he beheld from the white cliffs a strange war-vessel making for the
shore. Skilfully the men on board her ran her through the surf, and
beached her in a little creek between the cliffs, and made her fast to
a rock by stout cables. Only for a little time the valiant warden
watched them from afar, and then, one man against fifteen, he rode
quickly down and challenged the warriors.

    "What are ye warlike men      wielding bright weapons,
    Wearing grey corselets and      boar-adorned helmets,
    Who o'er the water-paths      come with your foaming keel
    Ploughing the ocean surge?      I was appointed
    Warden of Denmark's shores;      watch hold I by the wave
    That on this Danish coast      no deadly enemy
    Leading troops over sea      should land to injure.
    None have here landed yet      more frankly coming
    Than this fair company:      and yet ye answer not
    The password of warriors,      and customs of kinsmen.
    Ne'er have mine eyes beheld      a mightier warrior,
    An earl more lordly than      is he the chief of you;
    He is no common man;      if looks belie him not,
    He is a hero bold,      worthily weaponed.
    Anon must I know of you      kindred and country,
    Lest ye of spies should go      free on our Danish soil.
    Now ye men from afar,      sailing the surging sea,
    Have heard my earnest thought:      best is a quick reply,
    That I may swiftly know      whence ye have hither come."

Then Beowulf, with fearless eyes, gazed in the face of the warden and
told him simply and unboastfully who he was, from whence he came, and
what was his errand. He had come as the nation's deliverer, to slay
the thing that

    "Cometh in dark of night,      sateth his secret hate,
    Worketh through fearsome awe,      slaughter and shame."

With joy the warden heard his noble words.

"My men shall beach your ship," he said, "and make her fast with a
barrier of oars against the greedy tide. Come with me to the king."

It was a gallant band that strode into Heorot, where sat the old
king, gloom overshadowing his soul. And fit leader for a band of
heroes was Beowulf, a giant figure in ring-mail, spear and shield
gleaming in his hand, and by his side the mighty sword, Nägeling. To
Hrothgar, as to the warden, Beowulf told the reason of his coming, and
hope began again to live in the heart of the king.

That night the warriors from the land of the Goths were feasted in the
great banqueting-hall where, for twelve unhappy years, voices had
never rung out so bravely and so merrily. The queen herself poured out
the mead with which the king and the men from Gothland pledged each
other, and with her own hand she passed the goblet to each one. When,
last of it all, it came to the guest of honour, Beowulf took the cup
of mead from the fair queen and solemnly pledged himself to save the
land from the evil thing that devoured it like a pestilence, or to die
in his endeavour.

    "Needs must I now perform knightly deeds in this hall,
    Or here must meet my doom in darksome night."

When darkness fell the feast came to an end, and all left the hall
save Beowulf and his fourteen followers. In their armour, with swords
girt on their sides, the fourteen heroes lay down to rest, but Beowulf
laid aside all his arms and gave his sword to a thane to bear away.
For, said he,

    "I have heard
    That that foul miscreant's dark and stubborn flesh
    Recks not the force of arms ...
    Hand to hand ... Beowulf will grapple with the mighty foe."

From his fastnesses in the fens, the Grendel had heard the shouts of
revelry, and as the Goths closed their eyes to sleep, knowing they
might open them again only to grapple with hideous death, yet unafraid
because of their sure belief that "What is to be goes ever as it
must," the monster roused himself. Through the dank, chill, clinging
mists he came, and his breath made the poisonous miasma of the marshes
more deadly as he padded over the shivering reeds and trembling
rushes, across the bleak moorland and the high cliffs where the fresh
tang of the grey sea was defiled by the hideous stench of a foul beast
of prey. There was fresh food for him to-night, he knew, some blood
more potent than any that for twelve years had come his bestial way.
And he hastened on with greedy eagerness, nightmare incarnate. He
found the great door of the banqueting-hall bolted and barred, but one
angry wrench set at naught the little precautionary measures of mere
men.

The dawn was breaking dim and grey and very chill when Beowulf heard
the stealthy tread without, and the quick-following crash of the bolts
and bars that gave so readily. He made no movement, but only waited.
In an instant the dawn was blotted out by a vast black shadow, and
swifter than any great bear could strike, a scaly hand had struck one
of the friends of Beowulf. In an instant the man was torn from limb to
limb, and in a wild disgust and hatred Beowulf heard the lapping of
blood, the scrunching of bones and chewing of warm flesh as the
monster ravenously devoured him. Again the loathsome hand was
stretched out to seize and to devour. But in the darkness two hands,
like hands of iron, gripped the outstretched arm, and the Grendel knew
that he had met his match at last. The warriors of Beowulf awoke to
find a struggle going on such as their eyes never before beheld, for
it was a fight to the death between man and monster. Vainly they tried
to aid their leader, but their weapons only glanced harmlessly off the
Grendel's scaly hide. Up and down the hall the combatants wrestled,
until the walls shook and the great building itself rocked to its
foundations. Ever and again it seemed as though no human power could
prevail against teeth and claws and demonic fury, and as tables and
benches crashed to the ground and broke under the tramping feet of the
Grendel, it appeared an impossible thing that Beowulf should overcome.
Yet ever tighter and more tight grew the iron grip of Beowulf. His
fingers seemed turned to iron. His hatred and loathing made his grasp
crash through scales, into flesh, and crush the marrow out of the bone
it found there. And when at length the Grendel could no more, and with
a terrible cry wrenched himself free, and fled, wailing, back to the
fenland, still in his grasp Beowulf held the limb. The Grendel had
freed himself by tearing the whole arm out of its socket, and, for
once, the trail of blood across the moors was that of the monster and
not of its victims.

Great indeed was the rejoicing of Hrothgar and of his people when, in
the morning, instead of crimson-stained rushes and the track of vermin
claws imbrued in human blood, they found all but one of the men from
Gothland alive, and looked upon the hideous trophy that told them
that their enemy could only have gone to find a shameful death in the
marshes. They cleansed out the great hall, hung it with lordly
trappings, and made it once more fit habitation for the lordliest in
the land. That night a feast was held in it, such as had never before
been held all through the magnificent reign of Hrothgar. The best of
the scalds sung songs in honour of the triumph of Beowulf, and the
queen herself pledged the hero in a cup of mead and gave to him the
beautiful most richly jewelled collar Brisingamen, of exquisite
ancient workmanship, that once was owned by Freya, queen of the gods,
and a great ring of the purest red gold. To Beowulf, too, the king
gave a banner, all broidered in gold, a sword of the finest, with
helmet and corselet, and eight fleet steeds, and on the back of the
one that he deemed the best Hrothgar had placed his own saddle,
cunningly wrought, and decked with golden ornaments. To each of the
warriors of Beowulf there were also given rich gifts. And ere the
queen, with her maidens, left the hall that night she said to Beowulf:

"Enjoy thy reward, O dear Beowulf, while enjoy it thou canst. Live
noble and blessed! Keep well thy great fame, and to my dear sons, in
time to come, should ever they be in need, be a kind protector!"

With happy hearts in very weary bodies, Beowulf and his men left the
hall when the feast was ended, and they slept through the night in
another lodging as those sleep who have faced death through a very
long night, and to whom joy has come in the morning.

But the Danish knights, careless in the knowledge that the Grendel
must even now be in his dying agonies, and that once more Hereot was
for them a safe and noble sleeping-place, lay themselves down to sleep
in the hall, their shields at their heads, and, fastened high up on
the roof above them, the hideous trophy of Beowulf.

Next morning as the grey dawn broke over the northern sea, it saw a
sight that made it more chill than death. Across the moorland went a
thing--half wolf, half woman--the mother of Grendel. The creature she
had borne had come home to die, and to her belonged his avenging.
Softly she went to Hereot. Softly she opened the unguarded door.
Gladly, in her savage jaws, she seized Aschere, the thane who was to
Hrothgar most dear, and from the roof she plucked her desired
treasure--the arm of Grendel, her son. Then she trotted off to her
far-off, filthy den, leaving behind her the noise of lamentation.

Terrible was the grief of Hrothgar over the death of Aschere, dearest
of friends and sharer of his councils. And to his lamentations Beowulf
listened, sad at heart, humble, yet with a heart that burned for
vengeance. The hideous creature of the night was the mother of
Grendel, as all knew well. On her Beowulf would be avenged, for
Aschere's sake, for the king's, and for the sake of his own honour.
Then once again did he pledge himself to do all that man's strength
could do to rid the land of an evil thing. Well did he know how
dangerous was the task before him, and he gave directions for the
disposal of all that he valued should he never return from his quest.
To the King, who feared greatly that he was going forth on a forlorn
hope, he said:

    "Grieve not!... Each man must undergo death at the end of life.
    Let him win, while he may, warlike fame in the world!
    That is best after death for the slain warrior."

His own men, and Hrothgar, and a great company of Danes went with him
when he set out to trace the blood-stained tracks of the Grendel's
mother. Near the edge of a gloomy mere they found the head of Aschere.
And when they looked at the fiord itself, it seemed to be
blood-stained--stained with blood that ever welled upwards, and in
which revelled with a fierce sort of joy--the rapture of bestial
cruelty--water-monsters without number.

Beowulf, his face white and grim like that of an image of Thor cast in
silver, watched a little while, then drew his bow and drove a bolt
into the heart of one of them, and when they had drawn the slain
carcase to shore, the thanes of Hrothgar marvelled at the horror of
it.

Then Beowulf took leave of Hrothgar and told him that if in two days
he did not return, certain it would be that he would return no more.
The hearts of all who said farewell to him were heavy, but Beowulf
laughed, and bade them be of good cheer. Then into the black waters he
dived, sword in hand, clad in ring-armour, and the dark pool closed
over him as the river of Death closes over the head of a man when his
day is done. To him it seemed as if the space of a day had passed ere
he reached the bottom, and in his passing he encountered many dread
dangers from tusk and horn of a myriad evil creatures of the water who
sought to destroy him. Then at length he reached the bottom of that
sinister mere, and there was clasped in the murderous grip of the
Wolf-Woman who strove to crush his life out against her loathsome
breast. Again and again, when her hideous embrace failed to slay him,
she stabbed him with her knife. Yet ever did he escape. His good
armour resisted the power of her arm, and his own great muscles thrust
her from him. Yet his own sword failed him when he would have smitten
her, and the hero would have been in evil case had he not spied,
hanging on the wall of that most foul den,

                                "A glorious sword,
    An old brand gigantic,      trusty in point and edge,
    An heirloom of heroes."

Swiftly he seized it, and with it he dealt the Wolf-Woman a blow that
shore her head from her body. Through the foul blood that flowed from
her and that mingled with the black water of the mere, Beowulf saw a
very terrible horror--the body of the Grendel, lying moaning out the
last of his life. Again his strong arm descended, and, his left hand
gripping the coiled locks of the Evil Thing, he sprang upwards through
the water, that lost its blackness and its clouded crimson as he went
ever higher and more high. In his hand he still bore the sword that
had saved him, but the poisonous blood of the dying monsters had made
the water of such fiery heat that the blade melted as he rose, and
only the hilt, with strange runes engraved upon it, remained in his
hand.

Where he left them, his followers, and the Danes who went with them,
remained, watching, waiting, ever growing more hopeless as night
turned into day, and day faded into night, and they saw the black
waters of the lonely fen bubbling up, terrible and blood-stained. But
when the waters cleared, hope returned to their hearts, and when, at
length, Beowulf uprose from the water of the mere and they saw that in
his hand he bore the head of the Grendel, there was no lonely scaur,
nor cliff, nor rock of the land of the Danes that did not echo the
glad cry of "_Beowulf! Beowulf!_"

Well-nigh overwhelmed by gifts from those whom he had preserved was
the hero, Beowulf. But in modest, wise words he spoke to the King:

                                "Well hast thou treated us.
    If on this earth I can      do more to win thy love,
    O prince of warriors,      than I have wrought as yet,
    Here stand I ready now      weapons to wield for thee.
    If I shall ever hear      o'er the encircling flood
    That any neighbouring foes      threaten thy nation's fall,
    As Grendel grim before,      swift will I bring to thee
    Thousands of noble thanes,      heroes to help thee."

Then, in their ship, that the Warden of the Coast once had challenged,
Beowulf and his warriors set sail for their own dear land.

Gaily the vessel danced over the waves, heavy though it was with
treasure, nobly gained. And when Beowulf had come in safety to his
homeland and had told his kinsman the tale of the slaying of the
Grendel and of the Wolf-Woman, he gave the finest of his steeds to the
King, and to the Queen the jewelled collar, Brisingamen, that the
Queen of the Goths had bestowed on him. And the heart of his uncle was
glad and proud indeed, and there was much royal banqueting in the
hero's honour. Of him, too, the scalds made up songs, and there was no
hero in all that northern land whose fame was as great as was the fame
of Beowulf.

"The Must Be often helps an undoomed man when he is brave" was the
precept on which he ruled his life, and he never failed the King whose
chief champion and warrior he was. When, in an expedition against the
Frieslanders, King Hygelac fell a victim to the cunning of his foes,
the sword of Beowulf fought nobly for him to the end, and the hero was
a grievously wounded man when he brought back to Gothland the body of
the dead King. The Goths would fain have made him their King, in
Hygelac's stead, but Beowulf was too loyal a soul to supplant his
uncle's own son. On his shield he laid the infant prince, Hardred, and
held him up for the people to see. And when he had proclaimed the
child King and vowed to serve him faithfully all the days of his life,
there was no man there who did not loyally echo the promise of their
hero, Beowulf.

When Hardred, a grown man, was treacherously slain by a son of Othere,
he who discovered the North Cape, Beowulf once again was chosen King,
and for forty years he reigned wisely and well. The fame of his arms
kept war away from the land, and his wisdom as a statesman brought
great prosperity and happiness to his people. He had never known fear,
and so for him there was nothing to dread when the weakness of age
fell upon him and when he knew that his remaining years could be but
few:

    "Seeing that Death, a necessary end,
    Will come when it will come."[9]

Through all those years of peace, the thing that was to bring death to
him had lurked, unknown, unimagined, in a cave in the lonely
mountains.

Many centuries before the birth of Beowulf, a family of mighty
warriors had won by their swords a priceless treasure of weapons and
of armour, of richly chased goblets and cups, of magnificent ornaments
and precious jewels, and of gold "beyond the dreams of avarice." In a
great cave among the rocks it was hoarded by the last of their line,
and on his death none knew where it was hidden. Upon it one day there
stumbled a fiery dragon--a Firedrake--and for three hundred years the
monster gloated, unchallenged, over the magnificent possession. But at
the end of that time, a bondsman, who fled before his master's
vengeance and sought sanctuary in the mountains, came on an opening in
the rocks, and, creeping in, found the Firedrake asleep upon a mass of
red gold and of sparkling gems that dazzled his eyes even in the
darkness. For a moment he stood, trembling, then, sure of his master's
forgiveness if he brought him as gift a golden cup all studded with
jewels, he seized one and fled with it ere the monster could awake.
With its awakening, terror fell upon the land. Hither and thither it
flew, searching for him who had robbed it, and as it flew, it sent
flames on the earth and left behind it a black trail of ruin and of
death.

When news of its destroyings came to the ears of the father of his
people, Beowulf knew that to him belonged the task of saving the land
for them and for all those to come after them. But he was an old man,
and strength had gone from him, nor was he able now to wrestle with
the Firedrake as once he had wrestled with the Grendel and the
Wolf-Woman, but had to trust to his arms. He had an iron shield made
to withstand the Firedrake's flaming breath, and, with a band of
eleven picked followers, and taking the bondsman as guide, Beowulf
went out to fight his last fight. As they drew near the place, he bade
his followers stay where they were, "For I alone," he said, "will win
the gold and save my people, or Death shall take me."

From the entrance to the cave there poured forth a sickening cloud of
steam and smoke, suffocating and blinding, and so hot that he could
not go forward. But with a loud voice the old warrior shouted an
arrogant challenge of defiance to his enemy, and the Firedrake rushed
forth from its lair, roaring with the roar of an unquenchable fire
whose fury will destroy a city. From its wings of flame and from its
eyes heat poured forth scorchingly, and its great mouth belched forth
devouring flames as it cast itself on Beowulf.

[Illustration: A STROKE SHIVERED THE SWORD]

The hero's sword flashed, and smote a stark blow upon its scaly head.
But Beowulf could not deal death strokes as once he had done, and
only for a moment was his adversary stunned. In hideous rage the
monster coiled its snaky folds around him, and the heat from his body
made the iron shield redden as though the blacksmith in his smithy
were welding it, and each ring of the armour that Beowulf wore seared
right into his flesh. His breast swelled with the agony, and his great
heart must have come near bursting for pain and for sorrow. For he saw
that panic had come on his followers and that they were fleeing,
leaving him to his fate. Yet not all of them were faithless. Wiglaf,
young and daring, a dear kinsman of Beowulf, from whom he had received
many a kindness, calling shame on the dastards who fled, rushed
forward, sword in hand, and with no protection but that of his shield
of linden wood. Like a leaf scorched in a furnace the shield curled
up, but new strength came to Beowulf with the knowledge that Wiglaf
had not failed him in his need. Together the two heroes made a gallant
stand, although blood flowed in a swift red stream from a wound that
the monster had made in Beowulf's neck with its venomous fangs, and
ran down his corselet. A stroke which left the Firedrake unharmed
shivered the sword that had seen many fights, but Wiglaf smote a
shrewd blow ere his lord could be destroyed, and Beowulf swiftly drew
his broad knife and, with an effort so great that all the life that
was left in him seemed to go with it, he shore the Firedrake asunder.

Then Beowulf knew that his end drew very near, and when he had thanked
Wiglaf for his loyal help, he bade him enter the cave and bring forth
the treasure that he might please his dying eyes by looking on the
riches that he had won for his people. And Wiglaf hastened into the
cave, for he knew that he raced with Death, and brought forth armfuls
of weapons, of magnificent ornaments, of goblets and of cups, of bars
of red gold. Handfuls of sparkling jewels, too, he brought, and each
time he came and went, seizing without choosing, whatever lay nearest,
it seemed as though the Firedrake's hoard were endless. A magical
golden standard and armour and swords that the dwarfs had made brought
a smile of joy into the dying King's eyes. And when the ten shamed
warriors, seeing that the fight was at an end, came to where their
mighty ruler lay, they found him lying near the vile carcase of the
monster he had slain, and surrounded by a dazzlement of treasure
uncountable. To them, and to Wiglaf, Beowulf spoke his valediction,
urging on them to maintain the honour of the land of the Goths, and
then he said:

    "I thank God eternal,      the great King of Glory,
    For the vast treasures      which I here gaze upon,
    That I ere my death-day      might for my people
    Win so great wealth--      Since I have given my life,
    Thou must now look to      the needs of the nation;
    Here dwell I no longer,      for Destiny calleth me!
    Bid thou my warriors      after my funeral pyre
    Build me a burial-cairn      high on the sea-cliffs head;
    It shall for memory      tower up to Hronesness,
    So that the sea-farers      Beowulf's Barrow
    Henceforth shall name it,      they who drive far and wide
    Over the mighty flood      their foaming Reels.
    Thou art the last of all      the kindred of Wagmund!
    Wyrd[10] has swept all my kin,      all the brave chiefs away!
    Now must I follow them!"

Such was the passing of Beowulf, greatest of Northern heroes, and
under a mighty barrow on a cliff very high above the sea, they buried
him, and with him a great fortune from the treasure he had won. Then
with heavy hearts, "round about the mound rode his hearth-sharers, who
sang that he was of kings, of men, the mildest, kindest, to his people
sweetest, and the readiest in search of praise":

    "Gentlest, most gracious, most keen to win glory."

And if, in time, the great deeds of a mighty king of the Goths have
become more like fairy tale than solid history, this at least we know,
that whether it is in Saeland or on the Yorkshire coast--where

    "High on the sea-cliff ledges
    The white gulls are trooping and crying"

--the barrow of Beowulf covers a very valiant hero, a very perfect
gentleman.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] Shakespeare (_Julius Cæsar_).

[10] Goddess of Fate.




ROLAND THE PALADIN

    "Roland, the flower of chivalry,
    Expired at Roncevall."

        Thomas Campbell.

    "Hero-worship endures for ever while man
    endures."

        Carlyle.

    "Roland, the gode knight."

        Turpin's _History of Charlemagne_.


The old chroniclers tell us that on that momentous morning when
William the Conqueror led his army to victory at Hastings, a Norman
knight named Taillefer (and a figure of iron surely was his) spurred
his horse to the front. In face of the enemy who hated all things that
had to do with France, he lifted up his voice and chanted aloud the
exploits of Charlemagne and of Roland. As he sang, he threw his sword
in the air and always caught it in his right hand as it fell, and,
proudly, the whole army, moving at once, joined with him in the
_Chanson de Roland_, and shouted, as chorus, "God be our help! God be
our help!"

    "Taillefer ... chantoit de Rollant
    Et d'Olivier, et de Vassaux
    Qui mourent en Rainschevaux."

        Wace, _Roman de Rose_.

Fifteen thousand of those who sang fell on that bloody day, and one
wonders how many of those who went down to the Shades owed half their
desperate courage to the remembrance of the magnificent deeds of the
hero of whom they sang, ere ever sword met sword, or spear met the
sullen impact of the stark frame of a Briton born, fighting for his
own.

The story of Roland, so we are told, is only a splendid coating of
paint put on a very slender bit of drawing. A contemporary chronicle
tells of the battle of Roncesvalles, and says: "In which battle was
slain Roland, prefect of the marches of Brittany." Merely a Breton
squire, we are told to believe--a very gallant country gentleman whose
name would not have been preserved in priestly archives had he not won
for himself, by his fine courage, such an unfading laurel crown. But
because we are so sure that "it is the memory that the soldier leaves
after him, like the long trail of light that follows the sunken sun,"
and because so often oral tradition is less misleading than the
written word, we gladly and undoubtingly give Roland high place in the
Valhalla of heroes of all races and of every time.

777 or 778 A.D. is the date fixed for the great fight at Roncesvalles,
where Roland won death and glory. Charlemagne, King of the Franks, and
Head of the Holy Roman Empire, was returning victoriously from a seven
years' campaign against the Saracens in Spain.

    "No fortress stands before him unsubdued,
    Nor wall, nor city left to be destroyed,"

save one--the city of Saragossa, the stronghold of King Marsile or
Marsiglio. Here amongst the mountains the King and his people still
held to their idols, worshipped "Mahommed, Apollo, and Termagaunt,"
and looked forward with horror to a day when the mighty Charlemagne
might, by the power of the sword, thrust upon them the worship of the
crucified Christ. Ere Charlemagne had returned to his own land,
Marsile held a council with his peers. To believe that the great
conqueror would rest content with Saragossa still unconquered was too
much to hope for. Surely he would return to force his religion upon
them. What, then, was it best to do? A very wily emir was Blancandrin,
brave in war, and wise in counsel, and on his advice Marsile sent
ambassadors to Charlemagne to ask of him upon what conditions he would
be allowed to retain his kingdom in peace and to continue to worship
the gods of his fathers. Mounted on white mules, with silver saddles,
and with reins of gold, and bearing olive branches in their hands,
Blancandrin and the ten messengers sent by Marsile arrived at Cordova,
where Charlemagne rested with his army. Fifteen thousand tried
veterans were with him there, and his "Douzeperes"--his Twelve
Peers--who were to him what the Knights of the Round Table were to
King Arthur of Britain. He held his court in an orchard, and under a
great pine tree from which the wild honeysuckle hung like a fragrant
canopy, the mighty king and emperor sat on a throne of gold.

The messengers of Marsile saw a man of much more than ordinary stature
and with the commanding presence of one who might indeed conquer
kingdoms, but his sword was laid aside and he watched contentedly the
contests between the older of his knights who played chess under the
shade of the fruit trees, and the fencing bouts of the younger
warriors. Very dear to him were all his Douzeperes, yet dearest of all
was his own nephew, Roland. In him he saw his own youth again, his own
imperiousness, his reckless gallantry, his utter fearlessness--all
those qualities which endeared him to the hearts of other men. Roland
was his sister's son, and it was an evil day for the fair Bertha when
she told her brother that, in spite of his anger and scorn, she had
disobeyed his commands and had wed the man she loved, Milon, a poor
young knight.

No longer would Charlemagne recognise her as sister, and in obscurity
and poverty Roland was born. He was still a very tiny lad when his
father, in attempting to ford a flooded river, was swept down-stream
and drowned, and Bertha had no one left to fend for her and for her
child. Soon they had no food left, and the little Roland watched with
amazed eyes his famished mother growing so weak that she could not
rise from the bed where she lay, nor answer him when he pulled her by
the hand and tried to make her come with him to seek his father and to
find something to eat. And when he saw that it was hopeless, the child
knew that he must take his father's place and get food for the mother
who lay so pale, and so very still. Into a great hall where
Charlemagne and his lords were banqueting Roland strayed. Here was
food in plenty! Savoury smelling, delicious to his little empty
stomach were the daintily cooked meats which the Emperor and his court
ate from off their silver platters. Only one plateful of food such as
this must, of a surety, make his dear mother strong and well once
more. Not for a moment did Roland hesitate. Even as a tiny sparrow
darts into a lion's cage and picks up a scrap almost out of the
monarch's hungry jaws, so acted Roland. A plateful of food stood
beside the King. At this Roland sprang, seized it with both hands, and
joyfully ran off with his prey. When the serving men would have caught
him, Charlemagne, laughing, bade them desist.

"A hungry one this," he said, "and very bold."

So the meal went on, and when Roland had fed his mother with some
pieces of the rich food and had seen her gradually revive, yet another
thought came to his baby mind.

"My father gave her wine," he thought. "They were drinking wine in
that great hall. It will make her white cheeks red again."

Thus he ran back, as fast as his legs could carry him, and Charlemagne
smiled yet more when he saw the beautiful child, who knew no fear,
return to the place where he had thieved. Right up to the King's chair
he came, solemnly measured with his eye the cups of wine that the
great company quaffed, saw that the cup of Charlemagne was the most
beautiful and the fullest of the purple-red wine, stretched out a
daring little hand, grasped the cup, and prepared to go off again,
like a marauding bright-eyed bird. Then the King seized in his own
hand the hand that held the cup.

"No! no! bold thief," he said, "I cannot have my golden cup stolen
from me, be it done by ever so sturdy a robber. Tell me, who sent thee
out to steal?"

And Roland, an erect, gallant, little figure, his hand still in the
iron grip of the King, fearlessly and proudly gazed back into the eyes
of Charlemagne.

"No one sent me," he said. "My mother lay very cold and still and
would not speak, and she had said my father would come back no more,
so there was none but me to seek her food. Give me the wine, I say!
for she is so cold and so very, very white"--and the child struggled
to free his hand that still held the cup.

"Who art thou, then?" asked Charlemagne.

"My name is Roland--let me go, I pray thee," and again he tried to
drag himself free. And Charlemagne mockingly said:

"Roland, I fear thy father and mother have taught thee to be a clever
thief."

Then anger blazed in Roland's eyes.

"My mother is a lady of high degree!" he cried, "and I am her page,
her cupbearer, her knight! I do not speak false words!"--and he would
have struck the King for very rage.

Then Charlemagne turned to his lords and asked--"Who is this child?"

And one made answer: "He is the son of thy sister Bertha, and of Milon
the knight, who was drowned these three weeks agone."

Then the heart of Charlemagne grew heavy with remorse when he found
that his sister had so nearly died of want, and from that day she
never knew aught but kindness and tenderness from him, while Roland
was dear to him as his own child.

He was a Douzepere now, and when the envoys from Saragossa had
delivered their message to Charlemagne, he was one of those who helped
to do them honour at a great feast that was held for them in a
pavilion raised in the orchard.

Early in the morning Charlemagne heard mass, and then, on his golden
throne under the great pine, he sat and took counsel with his
Douzeperes. Not one of them trusted Marsile, but Ganelon, who had
married the widowed Bertha and who had a jealous hatred for his
step-son--so beloved by his mother, so loved and honoured by the
King--was ever ready to oppose the counsel of Roland. Thus did he
persuade Charlemagne to send a messenger to Marsile, commanding him to
deliver up the keys of Saragossa, in all haste to become a Christian,
and in person to come and, with all humility, pay homage as vassal to
Charlemagne.

Then arose the question as to which of the peers should bear the
arrogant message. Roland, ever greedy for the post of danger,
impetuously asked that he might be chosen. But Charlemagne would have
neither him nor his dear friend and fellow-knight, Oliver--he who was
the Jonathan of Roland's David--nor would he have Naismes de Bavière,
nor Turpin, "the chivalrous and undaunted Bishop of Rheims." He could
not afford to risk their lives, and Marsile was known to be
treacherous. Then he said to his peers:

"Choose ye for me whom I shall send. Let it be one who is wise;
brave, yet not over-rash, and who will defend mine honour valiantly."

Then Roland, who never knew an ungenerous thought, quickly said:
"Then, indeed, it must be Ganelon who goes, for if he goes, or if he
stays, you have none better than he."

And all the other peers applauded the choice, and Charlemagne said to
Ganelon:

"Come hither, Ganelon, and receive my staff and glove, which the voice
of all the Franks have given to thee."

But the honour which all the others coveted was not held to be an
honour by Ganelon. In furious rage he turned upon Roland:

"You and your friends have sent me to my death!" he cried. "But if by
a miracle I should return, look you to yourself, Roland, for assuredly
I shall be revenged!"

And Roland grew red, then very white, and said:

"I had taken thee for another man, Ganelon. Gladly will I take thy
place. Wilt give me the honour to bear thy staff and glove to
Saragossa, sire?" And eagerly he looked Charlemagne in the face--eager
as, when a child, he had craved the cup of wine for his mother's sake.

But Charlemagne, with darkened brow, shook his head.

"Ganelon must go," he said, "for so have I commanded. Go! for the
honour of Jesus Christ, and for your Emperor."

Thus, sullenly and unwillingly, and with burning hatred against
Roland in his heart, Ganelon accompanied the Saracens back to
Saragossa. A hate so bitter was not easy to hide, and as he rode
beside him the wily Blancandrin was not long in laying a probing
finger on this festering sore. Soon he saw that Ganelon would pay even
the price of his honour to revenge himself upon Roland and on the
other Douzeperes whose lives were more precious than his in the eyes
of Charlemagne. Yet, when Saragossa was reached, like a brave man and
a true did Ganelon deliver the insulting message that his own brain
had conceived and that the Emperor, with magnificent arrogance, had
bidden him deliver. And this he did, although he knew his life hung
but by a thread while Marsile and the Saracen lords listened to his
words. But Marsile kept his anger under, thinking with comfort of what
Blancandrin had told him of his discovery by the way. And very soon he
had shown Ganelon how he might be avenged on Roland and on the friends
of Roland, and in a manner which his treachery need never be known,
and very rich were the bribes that he offered to the faithless knight.

Thus it came about that Ganelon sold his honour, and bargained with
the Saracens to betray Roland and his companions into their hands in
their passage of the narrow defiles of Roncesvalles. For more than
fifty pieces of silver Marsile purchased the soul of Ganelon, and when
this Judas of the Douzeperes returned in safety to Cordova, bringing
with him princely gifts for Charlemagne, the keys of Saragossa, and
the promise that in sixteen days Marsile would repair to France to do
homage and to embrace the Christian faith, the Emperor was happy
indeed. All had fallen out as he desired. Ganelon, who had gone forth
in wrath, had returned calm and gallant, and had carried himself
throughout his difficult embassy as a wise statesman and a brave and
loyal soldier.

"Thou hast done well, Ganelon," said the king. "I give thanks to my
God and to thee. Thou shalt be well rewarded."

The order then was speedily given for a return to France, and for ten
miles the great army marched before they halted and encamped for the
night. But when Charlemagne slept, instead of dreams of peace he had
two dreams which disturbed him greatly. In the first, Ganelon roughly
seized the imperial spear of tough ash-wood and it broke into
splinters in his hand. In the next, Charlemagne saw himself attacked
by a leopard and a bear, which tore off his right arm, and as a
greyhound darted to his aid he awoke, and rose from his couch heavy at
heart because of those dreams of evil omen.

In the morning he held a council and reminded his knights of the
dangers of the lonely pass of Roncesvalles. It was a small oval plain,
shut in all round, save on the south where the river found its outlet,
by precipitous mountain ridges densely covered with beech woods.
Mountains ran sheer up to the sky above it, precipices rushed sheer
down below, and the path that crossed the crest of the Pyrenees and
led to it was so narrow that it must be traversed in single file. The
dangers for the rearguard naturally seemed to Charlemagne to be the
greatest, and to his Douzeperes he turned, as before, for counsel.

"Who, then, shall command the rearguard?" he asked. And quickly
Ganelon answered, "Who but Roland? Ever would he seek the post where
danger lies."

And Charlemagne, feeling he owed much to Ganelon, gave way to his
counsel, though with heavy forebodings in his heart. Then all the
other Douzeperes, save Ganelon, said that for love of Roland they
would go with him and see him safely through the dangers of the way.
Loudly they vaunted his bravery:

    "_For dred of dethe, he hid neuer his hed._"

Leaving them behind with twenty thousand men, and with Ganelon
commanding the vanguard, Charlemagne started.

"Christ keep you!" he said on parting with Roland--"_I betak you to
Crist._"

And Roland, clad in his shining armour, his lordly helmet on his head,
his sword Durendala by his side, his horn Olifant slung round him, and
his flower-painted shield on his arm, mounted his good steed
Veillantif, and, holding his bright lance with its white pennon and
golden fringe in his hand, led the way for his fellow-knights and for
the other Franks who so dearly loved him.

Not far from the pass of Roncesvalles he saw, gleaming against the
dark side of the purple mountain, the spears of the Saracens. Ten
thousand men, under Sir Gautier, were sent by Roland to reconnoitre,
but from every side the heathen pressed upon them, and every one of
the ten thousand were slain--hurled into the valley far down below.
Gautier alone, sorely wounded, returned to Roland, to tell him, ere
his life ebbed away, of the betrayal by Ganelon, and to warn him of
the ambush. Yet even then they were at Roncesvalles, and the warning
came too late. Afar off, amongst the beech trees, and coming down
amongst the lonely passes of the mountains, the Franks could see the
gleam of silver armour, and Oliver, well knowing that not even the
most dauntless valour could withstand such a host as the one that came
against them, besought Roland to blow a blast on his magic horn that
Charlemagne might hear and return to aid him. And all the other
Douzeperes begged of him that thus he would call for help. But Roland
would not listen to them.

    "I will fight with them that us hathe sought
    And or I se my brest blod throughe my harnes ryn
    Blow never horn for no help then."

Through the night they knew their enemies were coming ever nearer,
hemming them in, but there were no night alarms, and day broke fair
and still. There was no wind, there was dew on the grass; "dew dymmd
the floures," and amongst the trees the birds sang merrily. At
daybreak the good Bishop Turpin celebrated Mass and blessed them, and
even as his voice ceased they beheld the Saracen host close upon them.
Then Roland spoke brave words of cheer to his army and commended their
souls and his own to Christ, "who suffrid for us paynes sore," and
for whose sake they had to fight the enemies of the Cross. Behind
every tree and rock a Saracen seemed to be hidden, and in a moment the
whole pass was alive with men in mortal strife.

Surely never in any fight were greater prodigies of valour performed
than those of Roland and his comrades. Twelve Saracen kings fell
before their mighty swords, and many a Saracen warrior was hurled down
the cliffs to pay for the lives of the men of France whom they had
trapped to their death. Never before, in one day, did one man slay so
many as did Roland and Oliver his friend--"A Roland for an Oliver" was
no good exchange, and yet a very fair one, as the heathen quickly
learned.

    "Red was Roland, red with bloodshed;
    Red his corselet, red his shoulders,
    Red his arm, and red his charger."

In the thickest of the fight he and Oliver came together, and Roland
saw that his friend was using for weapon and dealing death-blows with
the truncheon of a spear.

    "'Friend, what hast thou there?' cried Roland.
    'In this game 'tis not a distaff,
    But a blade of steel thou needest.
    Where is now Hauteclaire, thy good sword,
    Golden-hilted, crystal-pommelled?'
    'Here,' said Oliver; 'so fight I
    That I have not time to draw it.'
    'Friend,' quoth Roland, 'more I love thee
    Ever henceforth than a brother.'"

When the sun set on that welter of blood, not a single Saracen was
left, and those of the Frankish rearguard who still lived were very
weary men.

Then Roland called on his men to give thanks to God, and Bishop
Turpin, whose stout arm had fought well on that bloody day, offered up
thanks for the army, though in sorry plight were they, almost none
unwounded, their swords and lances broken, and their hauberks rent and
blood-stained. Gladly they laid themselves down to rest beside the
comrades whose eyes never more would open on the fair land of France,
but even as Roland was about to take his rest he saw descending upon
him and his little band a host of Saracens, led by Marsile himself.

A hundred thousand men, untired, and fiercely thirsting for revenge,
came against the handful of wearied, wounded heroes. Yet with
unwavering courage the Franks responded to their leaders' call.

The war-cry of the soldiers of France--"Montjoie! Montjoie!"--rang
clear above the fierce sound of the trumpets of the Saracen army.

    "'Soldiers of the Lord,' cried Turpin,
    'Be ye valiant and steadfast,
    For this day shall crowns be given you
    Midst the flowers of Paradise.
    In the name of God our Saviour,
    Be ye not dismayed nor frighted,
    Lest of you be shameful legends
    Chanted by the tongues of minstrels.
    Rather let us die victorious,
    Since this eve shall see us lifeless!--
    Heaven has no room for cowards!
    Knights, who nobly fight, and vainly,
    Ye shall sit among the holy
    In the blessed fields of Heaven.
    On then, Friends of God, to glory!'"

Marsile fell, the first victim to a blow from the sword of Roland,
and even more fiercely than the one that had preceded it, waged this
terrible fight.

And now it seemed as though the Powers of Good and of Evil also took
part in the fray, for a storm swept down from the mountains, thick
darkness fell, and the rumble of thunder and the rush of heavy rain
dulled the shouts of those who fought and the clash and clang of their
weapons. When a blood-red cloud came up, its lurid light showed the
trampled ground strewn with dead and dying. At that piteous sight
Roland proposed to send a messenger to Charlemagne to ask him for aid,
but it was then too late.

When only sixty Franks remained, the pride of Roland gave way to pity
for the men whom he had led to death, and he took the magic horn
Olifant in his hand, that he might blow on it a blast that would bring
Charlemagne, his mighty army behind him, to wipe out the Saracen host
that had done him such evil. But Oliver bitterly protested. Earlier in
the day, when he had willed it, Roland had refused to call for help.
Now the day was done. The twilight of death--Death the inevitable--was
closing in upon them. Why, then, call now for Charlemagne, when nor he
nor any other could help them? But Turpin with all his force backed
the wish of Roland.

"The blast of thy horn cannot bring back the dead to life," he said.
"Yet if our Emperor return he can save our corpses and weep over them
and bear them reverently to la belle France. And there shall they lie
in sanctuary, and not in a Paynim land where the wild beasts devour
them and croaking wretches with foul beaks tear our flesh and leave
our bones dishonoured."

"That is well said," quoth Roland and Oliver.

Then did Roland blow three mighty blasts upon his horn, and so great
was the third that a blood-vessel burst, and the red drops trickled
from his mouth.

For days on end Charlemagne had been alarmed at the delay of his
rearguard, but ever the false Ganelon had reassured him.

"Why shouldst thou fear, sire?" he asked. "Roland has surely gone
after some wild boar or deer, so fond is he of the chase."

But when Roland blew the blast that broke his mighty heart,
Charlemagne heard it clearly, and no longer had any doubt of the
meaning of its call. He knew that his dreams had come true, and at
once he set his face towards the dire pass of Roncesvalles that he
might, even at the eleventh hour, save Roland and his men.

Long ere Charlemagne could reach the children of his soul who stood in
such dire need, the uncle of Marsile had reached the place of battle
with a force of fifty thousand men. Pierced from behind by a cowardly
lance, Oliver was sobbing out his life's blood. Yet ever he cried,
"Montjoie! Montjoie!" and each time his voice formed the words, a
thrust from his sword, or from the lances of his men, drove a soul
down to Hades. And when he was breathing his last, and lay on the
earth, humbly confessing his sins and begging God to grant him rest in
Paradise, he asked God's blessing upon Charlemagne, his lord the
king, and upon his fair land of France, and, above all other men, to
keep free from scathe his heart's true brother and comrade, Roland,
the gallant knight. Then did he gently sigh his last little measure of
life away, and as Roland bent over him he felt that half of the
glamour of living was gone. Yet still so dearly did he love Aude the
Fair, the sister of Oliver, who was to be his bride, that his muscles
grew taut as he gripped his sword, and his courage was the dauntless
courage of a furious wave that faces all the cliffs of a rocky coast
in a winter storm, when again, he faced the Saracen host.

Of all the Douzeperes, only Gautier and Turpin and Roland now
remained, and with them a poor little handful of maimed men-at-arms.
Soon a Saracen arrow drove through the heart of Gautier, and Turpin,
wounded by four lances, stood alone by Roland's side. But for each
lance thrust he slew a hundred men, and when at length he fell,
Roland, himself sorely wounded, seized once more his horn and blew
upon it a piercing blast:

      "... a blast of that dread horn,
    On Fontarabian echoes borne,
      That to King Charles did come,
    When Rowland brave, and Olivier,
    And every paladin and peer,
      On Roncesvalles died."

        Sir Walter Scott.

[Illustration: ROLAND SEIZED ONCE MORE HIS HORN]

That blast pierced right into the heart of Charlemagne, and
straightway he turned his army towards the pass of Roncesvalles that
he might succour Roland, whom he so greatly loved. Yet then it was too
late. Turpin was nearly dead. Roland knew himself to be dying.
Veillantif, Roland's faithful warhorse, was enduring agonies from
wounds of the Paynim arrows, and him Roland slew with a shrewd blow
from his well-tried sword. From far, far away the hero could hear the
blare of the trumpets of the Frankish army, and, at the sound, what
was left of the Saracen host fled in terror. He made his way, blindly,
painfully, to where Turpin lay, and with fumbling fingers took off his
hauberk and unlaced his golden helmet. With what poor skill was left
to him, he strove to bind up his terrible wounds with strips of his
own tunic, and he dragged him, as gently as he could, to a spot under
the beech trees where the fresh moss still was green.

    "'Ah, gentle lord,' said Roland, 'give me leave
    To carry here our comrades who are dead,
    Whom we so dearly loved; they must not lie
    Unblest; but I will bring their corpses here
    And thou shalt bless them, and me, ere thou die.'
    'Go,' said the dying priest, 'but soon return.
    Thank God! the victory is yours and mine!'"

With exquisite pain Roland carried the bodies of Oliver and of the
rest of the Douzeperes from the places where they had died to where
Turpin, their dear bishop, lay a-dying. Each step that he took cost
him a pang of agony; each step took from him a toll of blood. Yet
faithfully he performed his task, until they all lay around Turpin,
who gladly blessed them and absolved them all. And then the agony of
soul and of heart and body that Roland had endured grew overmuch for
him to bear, and he gave a great cry, like the last sigh of a mighty
tree that the woodcutters fell, and dropped down, stiff and chill, in
a deathly swoon. Then the dying bishop dragged himself towards him and
lifted the horn Olifant, and with it in his hand he struggled, inch by
inch, with very great pain and labour, to a little stream that
trickled down the dark ravine, that he might fetch some water to
revive the hero that he and all men loved. But ere he could reach the
stream, the mists of death had veiled his eyes. He joined his hands in
prayer, though each movement meant a pang, and gave his soul to
Christ, his Saviour and his Captain. And so passed away the soul of a
mighty warrior and a stainless priest.

Thus was Roland alone amongst the dead when consciousness came back to
him. With feeble hands he unlaced his helmet and tended to himself as
best he might. And, as Turpin had done, so also did he painfully crawl
towards the stream. There he found Turpin, the horn Olifant by his
side, and knew that it was in trying to fetch him water that the brave
bishop had died, and for tenderness and pity the hero wept.

    "Alas! brave priest, fair lord of noble birth,
    Thy soul I give to the great King of Heaven!

               *   *   *   *   *

    May thy fair soul escape the pains of Hell,
    And Paradise receive thee in its bowers!"

Then did Roland know that for him, also, there "was no other way but
death." With dragging steps he toiled uphill a little way, his good
sword Durendala in one hand, and in the other his horn Olifant. Under
a little clump of pines were some rough steps hewn in a boulder of
marble leading yet higher up the hill, and these Roland would have
climbed, but his throbbing heart could no more, and again he fell
swooning on the ground. A Saracen who, out of fear, had feigned death,
saw him lying there and crawled out of the covert where he lay
concealed.

"It is Roland, the nephew of the Emperor!" he joyously thought, and in
triumph he said to himself, "I shall bear his sword back with me!" But
as his Pagan hand touched the hilt of the sword and would have torn it
from Roland's dying grasp, the hero was aroused from his swoon. One
great stroke cleft the Saracen's skull and laid him dead at Roland's
feet. Then to Durendala Roland spoke:

    "I surely die; but, ere I end,
    Let me be sure that thou art ended too my friend!
    For should a heathen grasp thee when I am clay,
    My ghost would grieve full sore until the judgment day!"

More ghost than man he looked as with a mighty effort of will and of
body he struggled to his feet and smote with his blade the marble
boulder. Before the stroke the marble split asunder as though the
pick-axe of a miner had cloven it. On a rock of sardonyx he strove to
break it then, but Durendala remained unharmed. A third time he
strove, and struck a rock of blue marble with such force that the
sparks rushed out as from a blacksmith's anvil. Then he knew that it
was in vain, for Durendala would not be shattered. And so he raised
Olifant to his lips and blew a dying blast that echoed down the cliffs
and up to the mountain tops and rang through the trees of the forest.
And still, to this day, do they say, when the spirit of the warrior
rides by night down the heights and through the dark pass of
Roncesvalles, even such a blast may be heard, waking all the echoes
and sounding through the lonely hollows of the hills.

Then he made confession, and with a prayer for pardon of his sins and
for mercy from the God whose faithful servant and soldier he had been
unto his life's end, the soul of Roland passed away.

              "... With hands devoutly joined
    He breathed his last. God sent his Cherubim,
    Saint Raphael, Saint Michel del Peril.
    Together with them Gabriel came.--All bring
    The soul of Count Rolland to Paradise.
                                      Aoi."

Charlemagne and his army found him lying thus, and very terrible were
the grief and the rage of the Emperor as he looked on him and on the
others of his Douzeperes and on the bodies of that army of twenty
thousand.

"All the field was with blod ouer roun"--"Many a good swerd was broken
ther"--"Many a fadirles child ther was at home."

By the side of Roland, Charlemagne vowed vengeance, but ere he avenged
his death he mourned over him with infinite anguish:

    "'The Lord have mercy, Roland, on thy soul!
    Never again shall our fair France behold
    A knight so worthy, till France be no more!

               *   *   *   *   *

    How widowed lies our fair France, and how lone!
    How will the realms that I have swayed rebel,
    Now thou art taken from my weary age!
    So deep my woe that fain would I die too
    And join my valiant Peers in Paradise,
    While men inter my weary limbs with thine!'"

A terrible vengeance was the one that he took next day, when the
Saracen army was utterly exterminated; and when all the noble dead had
been buried where they fell, save only Roland, Oliver, and Turpin, the
bodies of these three heroes were carried to Blaye and interred with
great honour in the great cathedral there.

Charlemagne then returned to Aix, and as he entered his palace, Aude
the Fair, sister of Oliver, and the betrothed of Roland, hastened to
meet him. Where were the Douzeperes? What was the moaning murmur as of
women who wept, that had heralded the arrival in the town of the
Emperor and his conquering army? Eagerly she questioned Charlemagne of
the safety of Roland, and when the Emperor, in pitying grief, told
her:

"Roland, thy hero, like a hero died," Aude gave a bitter cry and fell
to the ground like a white lily slain by a cruel wind. The Emperor
thought she had fainted, but when he would have lifted her up, he
found that she was dead, and, in infinite pity, he had her taken to
Blaye and buried by the side of Roland.

Very tender was Charlemagne to the maiden whom Roland had loved, but
when the treachery of Ganelon had been proved, for him there was no
mercy. At Aix-la-Chapelle, torn asunder by wild horses, he met a
shameful and a horrible death, nor is his name forgotten as that of
the blackest of traitors. But the memory of Roland and of the other
Douzeperes lives on and is, however fanciful, forever fragrant.

                    "... Roland, and Olyvere,
    And of the twelve Tussypere,
    That dieden in the batayle of Runcyvale;
    Jesu lord, heaven king,
    To his bliss hem and us both bring,
    To liven withouten bale!"

        Sir Otuel.




THE CHILDREN OF LÎR

    "Silent, O Moyle, be the roar of thy water;
    Break not, ye breezes, your chain of repose;
    While murmuring mournfully, Lîr's lonely daughter
    Tells to the night-star her tale of woes."

        Moore.


They are the tragedies, not the comedies of the old, old days that are
handed down to us, and the literature of the Celts is rich in tragedy.
To the romantic and sorrowful imagination of the Celts of the green
island of Erin we owe the hauntingly piteous story of the children of
Lîr.

In the earliest times of all, when Ireland was ruled by the Dedannans,
a people who came from Europe and brought with them from Greece magic
and other arts so wonderful that the people of the land believed them
to be gods, the Dedannans had so many chiefs that they met one day to
decide who was the best man of them all, that they might choose him to
be their king. The choice fell upon Bodb the Red, and gladly did every
man acclaim him as king, all save Lîr of Shee Finnaha, who left the
council in great wrath because he thought that he, and not Bodb,
should have been chosen. In high dudgeon he retired to his own place,
and in the years that followed he and Bodb the Red waged fierce war
against one another. At last a great sorrow came to Lîr, for after an
illness of three days his wife, who was very dear to him, was taken
from him by death. Then Bodb saw an opportunity for reconciliation
with the chief whose enemy he had no wish to be. And to the
grief-stricken husband he sent a message:

"My heart weeps for thee, yet I pray thee to be comforted. In my house
have I three maidens, my foster-daughters, the most beautiful and the
best instructed in all Erin. Choose which one thou wilt for thy wife,
and own me for thy lord, and my friendship shall be thine forever."

And the message brought comfort to Lîr, and he set out with a gallant
company of fifty chariots, nor ever halted until he had reached the
palace of Bodb the Red at Lough Derg, on the Shannon. Warm and kindly
was the welcome that Lîr received from his overlord, and next day, as
the three beautiful foster-daughters of Bodb sat on the same couch as
his queen, Bodb said to Lîr:

"Behold my three daughters. Choose which one thou wilt."

And Lîr answered, "They are all beautiful, but Eve is the eldest, so
she must be the noblest of the three. I would have her for my wife."

That day he married Eve, and Lîr took his fair young wife back with
him to his own place, Shee Finnaha, and happy were both of them in
their love. To them in course of time were born a twin son and a
daughter. The daughter they named Finola and the son Aed, and the
children were as beautiful, as good, and as happy as their mother.
Again she bore twins, boys, whom they named Ficra and Conn, but as
their eyes opened on the world, the eyes of their mother closed on
pleasant life forever, and once again Lîr was a widower, more bowed
down by grief than before.

The tidings of the death of Eve brought great sorrow to the palace of
Bodb the Red, for to all who knew her Eve was very dear. But again the
king sent a message of comfort to Lîr:

"We sorrow with thee, yet in proof of our friendship with thee and our
love for the one who is gone, we would give thee another of our
daughters to be a mother to the children who have lost their mother's
care."

And again Lîr went to the palace at Loch Derg, the Great Lake, and
there he married Eva, the second of the foster-daughters of the king.

At first it seemed as if Eva loved her dead sister's children as
though they were her own. But when she saw how passionate was her
husband's devotion to them, how he would have them to sleep near him
and would rise at their slightest whimper to comfort and to caress
them, and how at dawn she would wake to find he had left her side to
see that all was well with them, the poisonous weed of jealousy began
to grow up in the garden of her heart. She was a childless woman, and
she knew not whether it was her sister who had borne them whom she
hated, or whether she hated the children themselves. But steadily the
hatred grew, and the love that Bodb the Red bore for them only
embittered her the more. Many times in the year he would come to see
them, many times would take them away to stay with him, and each year
when the Dedannans held the Feast of Age--the feast of the great god
Mannanan, of which those who partook never grew old--the four children
of Lîr were present, and gave joy to all who beheld them by their
great beauty, their nobility, and their gentleness.

But as the love that all others gave to the four children of Lîr grew,
the hatred of Eva, their stepmother, kept pace with it, until at
length the poison in her heart ate into her body as well as her soul,
and she grew worn and ill out of her very wickedness. For nearly a
year she lay sick in bed, while the sound of the children's laughter
and their happy voices, their lovely faces like the faces of the
children of a god, and the proud and loving words with which their
father spoke of them were, to her, like acid in a festering wound. At
last there came a black day when jealousy had choked all the flowers
of goodness in her heart, and only treachery and merciless cruelty
remained. She rose from her couch and ordered the horses to be yoked
to her chariot that she might take the four children to the Great Lake
to see the king, her foster-father. They were but little children, yet
the instinct that sometimes tells even a very little child when it is
near an evil thing, warned Finola that harm would come to her and to
her brothers were they to go. It may also have been, perhaps, that she
had seen, with the sharp vision of a woman child, the thing to which
Lîr was quite blind, and that in a tone of her stepmother's voice, in
a look she had surprised in her eyes, she had learned that the love
that her father's wife professed for her and for the others was only
hatred, cunningly disguised. Thus she tried to make excuses for
herself and the little brothers to whom she was a child-mother, so
that they need not go. But Eva listened with deaf ears, and the
children said farewell to Lîr, who must have wondered at the tears
that stood in Finola's eyes and the shadow that darkened their blue,
and drove off in the chariot with their stepmother.

When they had driven a long way, Eva turned to her attendants: "Much
wealth have I," she said, "and all that I have shall be yours if you
will slay for me those four hateful things that have stolen from me
the love of my man."

The servants heard her in horror, and in horror and shame for her they
answered: "Fearful is the deed thou wouldst have us do; more fearful
still is it that thou shouldst have so wicked a thought. Evil will
surely come upon thee for having wished to take the lives of Lîr's
innocent little children."

Angrily, then, she seized a sword and herself would fain have done
what her servants had scorned to do. But she lacked strength to carry
out her own evil wish, and so they journeyed onwards. They came to
Lake Darvra at last--now Lough Derravaragh, in West Meath--and there
they all alighted from the chariot, and the children, feeling as
though they had been made to play at an ugly game, but that now it was
over and all was safety and happiness again, were sent into the loch
to bathe. Joyously and with merry laughter the little boys splashed
into the clear water by the rushy shore, all three seeking to hold
the hands of their sister, whose little slim white body was whiter
than the water-lilies and her hair more golden than their hearts.

It was then that Eva struck them, as a snake strikes its prey. One
touch for each, with a magical wand of the Druids, then the low
chanting of an old old rune, and the beautiful children had vanished,
and where their tiny feet had pressed the sand and their yellow hair
had shown above the water like four daffodil heads that dance in the
wind, there floated four white swans. But although to Eva belonged the
power of bewitching their bodies, their hearts and souls and speech
still belonged to the children of Lîr. And when Finola spoke, it was
not as a little timid child, but as a woman who could look with sad
eyes into the future and could there see the terrible punishment of a
shameful act.

"Very evil is the deed that thou hast done," she said. "We only gave
thee love, and we are very young, and all our days were happiness. By
cruelty and treachery thou hast brought our childhood to an end, yet
is our doom less piteous than thine. Woe, woe unto thee, O Eva, for a
fearful doom lies before thee!"

Then she asked--a child still, longing to know when the dreary days of
its banishment from other children should be over--"Tell us how long a
time must pass until we can take our own forms again."

[Illustration: ONE TOUCH FOR EACH, WITH A MAGICAL WAND OF THE DRUIDS]

And, relentlessly, Eva made answer: "Better had it been for thy peace
hadst thou left unsought that knowledge. Yet will I tell thee thy
doom. Three hundred years shall ye live in the smooth waters of Lake
Darvra; three hundred years on the Sea of Moyle,[11] which is
between Erin and Alba; three hundred years more at Ivros Domnann[12]
and at Inis Glora,[13] on the Western Sea. Until a prince from the
north shall marry a princess from the south; until the Tailleken (St.
Patrick) shall come to Erin, and until ye shall hear the sound of the
Christian bell, neither my power nor thy power, nor the power of any
Druid's runes can set ye free until that weird is dreed."

As she spoke, a strange softening came into the evil woman's heart.
They were so still, those white creatures who gazed up at her with
eager, beseeching eyes, through which looked the souls of the little
children that once she had loved. They were so silent and piteous, the
little Ficra and Conn, whose dimpled baby faces she often used to
kiss. And she said, that her burden of guilt might be the lighter:

"This relief shall ye have in your troubles. Though ye keep your human
reason and your human speech, yet shall ye suffer no grief because
your form is the form of swans, and you shall sing songs more sweet
than any music that the earth has ever known."

Then Eva went back to her chariot and drove to the palace of her
foster-father at the Great Lake, and the four white swans were left on
the lonely waters of Darvra.

When she reached the palace without the children, the king asked in
disappointment why she had not brought them with her.

"Lîr loves thee no longer," she made answer. "He will not trust his
children to thee, lest thou shouldst work them some ill."

But her father did not believe her lying words. Speedily he sent
messengers to Shee Finnaha that they might bring back the children who
ever carried joy with them. Amazed, Lîr received the message, and when
he learned that Eva had reached the palace alone, a terrible dread
arose in his heart. In great haste he set out, and as he passed by
Lake Darvra he heard voices singing melodies so sweet and moving that
he was fain, in spite of his fears, to stop and listen. And lo, as he
listened, he found that the singers were four swans, that swam close
up to where he stood, and greeted him in the glad voices of his own
dear children. All that night he stayed beside them, and when they had
told him their piteous tale and he knew that no power could free them
till the years of their doom were accomplished, Lîr's heart was like
to break with pitying love and infinite sorrow. At dawn he took a
tender leave of them and drove to the house of Bodb the Red. Terrible
were the words of Lîr, and dark was his face as he told the king the
evil thing that Eva had done. And Eva, who had thought in the madness
of her jealousy that Lîr would give her all his love when he was a
childless man, shrank, white and trembling, away from him when she saw
the furious hatred in his eyes. Then said the king, and his anger was
even as the anger of Lîr:

"The suffering of the little children who are dear to our souls shall
come to an end at last. Thine shall be an eternal doom."

And he put her on oath to tell him "what shape of all others, on the
earth, or above the earth, or beneath the earth, she most abhorred,
and into which she most dreaded to be transformed."

"A demon of the air," answered the cowering woman.

"A demon of the air shalt thou be until time shall cease!" said her
foster-father. Thereupon he smote her with his druidical wand, and a
creature too hideous for men's eyes to look upon, gave a great scream
of anguish, and flapped its black wings as it flew away to join the
other demons of the air.

Then the king of the Dedannans and all his people went with Lîr to
Lake Darvra, and listened to the honey-sweet melodies that were sung
to them by the white swans that had been the children of their hearts.
And such magic was in the music that it could lull away all sorrow and
pain, and give rest to the grief-stricken and sleep to the toil-worn
and the heavy at heart. And the Dedannans made a great encampment on
the shores of the lake that they might never be far from them. There,
too, as the centuries went by, came the Milesians, who succeeded the
Dedannans in Erin, and so for the children of Lîr three hundred years
passed happily away.

Sad for them and for Lîr, and for all the people of the Dedannans, was
the day when the years at Darvra were ended and the four swans said
farewell to their father and to all who were so dear to them, spread
their snowy pinions, and took flight for the stormy sea. They sang a
song of parting that made grief sit heavy on the hearts of all those
who listened, and the men of Erin, in memory of the children of Lîr
and of the good things they had wrought by the magic of their music,
made a law, and proclaimed it throughout all the land, that from that
time forth no man of their land should harm a swan.

Weary were the great white wings of the children of Lîr when they
reached the jagged rocks by the side of the fierce grey sea of Moyle,
whose turbulent waves fought angrily together. And the days that came
to them there were days of weariness, of loneliness, and of hardship.
Very cold were they often, very hungry, and yet the sweetness of their
song pierced through the vicious shriek of the tempest and the sullen
boom and crash of the great billows that flung themselves against the
cliffs or thundered in devouring majesty over the wrack-strewn shore,
like a thread of silver that runs through a pall. One night a tempest
drove across and down the Sea of Moyle from the north-east, and lashed
it into fury. And the mirk darkness and the sleet that drove in the
teeth of the gale like bullets of ice, and the huge, irresistible
breakers that threshed the shore, filled the hearts of the children of
Lîr with dread. For always they had desired love and beauty, and the
ugliness of unrestrained cruelty and fury made them sick at soul.

To her brothers Finola said: "Beloved ones, of a surety the storm must
drive us apart. Let us, then, appoint a place of meeting, lest we
never look upon each other again."

And, knowing that she spoke wisely and well, the three brothers
appointed as their meeting-place the rock of Carricknarone.

Never did a fiercer storm rage on the sea between Alba and Erin than
the storm that raged that night. Thunderous, murky clouds blotted out
stars and moon, nor was there any dividing line between sky and sea,
but both churned themselves up together in a passion of destruction.
When the lightning flashed, it showed only the fury of the cruel seas,
the shattered victims of the destroying storm. Very soon the swans
were driven one from another and scattered over the face of the angry
deep. Scarcely could their souls cling to their bodies while they
struggled with the winds and waves. When the long, long night came to
an end, in the grey and cheerless dawn Finola swam to the rock of
Carricknarone. But no swans were there, only the greedy gulls that
sought after wreckage, and the terns that cried very dolorously.

Then great grief came upon Finola, for she feared she would see her
brothers nevermore. But first of all came Conn, his feathers all
battered and broken and his head drooping, and in a little Ficra
appeared, so drenched and cold and beaten by the winds that no word
could he speak. And Finola took her younger brothers under her great
white wings, and they were comforted and rested in that warm shelter.

"If Aed would only come," she said, "then should we be happy indeed."

And even as she spoke, they beheld Aed sailing towards them like a
proud ship with its white sails shining in the sun, and Finola held
him close to the snowy plumage of her breast, and happiness returned
to the children of Lîr.

Many another tempest had they to strive with, and very cruel to them
were the snow and biting frosts of the dreary winters. One January
night there came a frost that turned even the restless sea into solid
ice, and in the morning, when the swans strove to rise from the rock
of Carricknarone, the iron frost clung to them and they left behind
them the skin of their feet, the quills of their wings, and the soft
feathers of their breasts, and when the frost had gone, the salt water
was torture for their wounds. Yet ever they sang their songs, piercing
sweet and speaking of the peace and joy to come, and many a
storm-tossed mariner by them was lulled to sleep and dreamt the happy
dreams of his childhood, nor knew who had sung him so magical a
lullaby. It was in those years that Finola sang the song which a poet
who possessed the wonderful heritage of a perfect comprehension of the
soul of the Gael has put into English words for us.

    "Happy our father Lîr afar,
    With mead, and songs of love and war:
    The salt brine, and the white foam,
    With these his children have their home.

    In the sweet days of long ago,
    Soft-clad we wandered to and fro:
    But now cold winds of dawn and night
    Pierce deep our feathers thin and light.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Beneath my wings my brothers lie
    When the fierce ice-winds hurtle by;
    On either side and 'neath my breast
    Lîr's sons have known no other rest."

        Fiona Macleod (William Sharp).

Only once during those dreary three hundred years did the children of
Lîr see any of their friends. When they saw, riding down to the shore
at the mouth of the Bann on the north coast of Erin, a company in
gallant attire, with glittering arms, and mounted on white horses, the
swans hastened to meet them. And glad were their hearts that day, for
the company was led by two sons of Bodb the Red, who had searched for
the swans along the rocky coast of Erin for many a day, and who
brought them loving greetings from the good king of the Dedannans and
from their father Lîr.

At length the three hundred years on the Sea of Moyle came to an end,
and the swans flew to Ivros Domnann and the Isle of Glora in the
western sea. And there they had sufferings and hardships to bear that
were even more grievous than those that they had endured on the Sea of
Moyle, and one night the snow that drifted down upon them from the ice
was scourged on by a north-west wind, and there came a moment when the
three brothers felt that they could endure no more.

But Finola said to them:

"It is the great God of truth who made both land and sea who alone can
succour us, for He alone can wholly understand the sorrows of our
hearts. Put your trust in Him, dear brothers, and He will send us
comfort and help."

Then said her brothers: "In Him we put our trust," and from that
moment the Lord of Heaven gave them His help, so that no frost, nor
snow, nor cold, nor tempest, nor any of the creatures of the deep
could work them any harm.

When the nine hundred years of their sorrowful doom had ended, the
children of Lîr joyously spread their wings and flew to their father's
home at Shee Finnaha.

But the house was there no more, for Lîr, their father, was dead. Only
stones, round which grew rank grass and nettles, and where no human
creature had his habitation, marked the place for which they had
longed with an aching, hungry longing, through all their weary years
of doom. Their cries were piteous as the cries of lost children as
they looked on the desolate ruins, but all night they stayed there,
and their songs were songs that might have made the very stones shed
tears.

Next day they winged their way back to Inis Glora, and there the
sweetness of their singing drew so many birds to listen that the
little lake got the name of the Lake of the Bird-Flocks. Near and far,
for long thereafter, flew the swans, all along the coast of the
Western Sea, and at the island of Iniskea they held converse with the
lonely crane that has lived there since the beginning of the world,
and which will live there until time is no more.

And while the years went by, there came to Erin one who brought glad
tidings, for the holy Patrick came to lead men out of darkness into
light. With him came Kemoc, and Kemoc made his home on Inis Glora.

At dawn one morning, the four swans were roused by the tinkle of a
little bell. It was so far away that it rang faintly, but it was like
no sound they had ever known, and the three brothers were filled with
fear and flew hither and thither, trying to discover from whence the
strange sound came. But when they returned to Finola, they found her
floating at peace on the water.

"Dost not know what sound it is?" she asked, divining their thoughts.

"We heard a faint, fearful voice," they said, "but we know not what it
is."

Then said Finola: "It is the voice of the Christian bell. Soon, now,
shall our suffering be ended, for such is the will of God."

So very happily and peacefully they listened to the ringing of the
bell, until Kemoc had said matins. Then said Finola: "Let us now sing
our music," and they praised the Lord of heaven and earth.

And when the wonderful melody of their song reached the ears of Kemoc,
he knew that none but the children of Lîr could make such magic-sweet
melody. So he hastened to where they were, and when he asked them if
they were indeed the children of Lîr, for whose sake he had come to
Inis Glora, they told him all their piteous tale.

Then said Kemoc, "Come then to land, and put your trust in me, for on
this island shall your enchantment come to an end." And when most
gladly they came, he caused a cunning workman to fashion two slender
silver chains; one he put between Finola and Aed, and the other
between Ficra and Conn, and so joyous were they to know again human
love, and so happy to join each day with Kemoc in praising God, that
the memory of their suffering and sorrow lost all its bitterness. Thus
in part were the words of Eva fulfilled, but there had yet to take
place the entire fulfilment of her words.

Decca, a princess of Munster, had wed Larguen, king of Connaught, and
when news came to her of the wonderful swans of Kemoc, nothing would
suffice her but that she should have them for her own. By constant
beseeching, she at length prevailed upon Larguen to send messengers to
Kemoc, demanding the swans. When the messengers returned with a stern
refusal from Kemoc, the king was angry indeed. How dared a mere cleric
refuse to gratify the whim of the queen of Larguen of Connaught! To
Inis Glora he went, posthaste, himself.

"Is it truth that ye have dared to refuse a gift of your birds to my
queen?" he asked, in wrath.

And Kemoc answered: "It is truth."

Then Larguen, in furious anger, seized hold of the silver chain that
bound Finola and Aed together, and of the chain by which Conn and
Ficra were bound, and dragged them away from the altar by which they
sat, that he might take them to his queen.

But as the king held their chains in his rude grasp, a wondrous thing
took place.

Instead of swans, there followed Larguen a very old woman,
white-haired and feeble, and three very old men, bony and wrinkled
and grey. And when Larguen beheld them, terror came upon him and he
hastened homeward, followed by the bitter denunciations of Kemoc. Then
the children of Lîr, in human form at last, turned to Kemoc and
besought him to baptize them, because they knew that death was very
near.

"Thou art not more sorrowful at parting from us than we are to part
with you, dear Kemoc," they said. And Finola said, "Bury us, I pray
you, together."

    "As oft in life my brothers dear
      Were sooth'd by me to rest--
    Ficra and Conn beneath my wings,
      And Aed before my breast;

    So place the two on either hand--
      Close, like the love that bound me;
    Place Aed as close before my face,
      And twine their arms around me."

        Joyce.

So Kemoc signed them in Holy Baptism with the blessed Cross, and even
as the water touched their foreheads, and while his words were in
their ears, death took them. And, as they passed, Kemoc looked up,
and, behold, four beautiful children, their faces radiant with joy,
and with white wings lined with silver, flying upwards to the clouds.
And soon they vanished from his sight and he saw them no more.

He buried them as Finola had wished, and raised a mound over them, and
carved their names on a stone.

And over it he sang a lament and prayed to the God of all love and
purity, a prayer for the pure and loving souls of those who had been
the children of Lîr.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] The North Channel.

[12] Erris, in Mayo.

[13] A small island off Benmullet.




DEIRDRÊ

    "Her beauty filled the old world of the Gael with a
    sweet, wonderful, and abiding rumour. The name of
    Deirdrê has been as a harp to a thousand poets. In a
    land of heroes and brave and beautiful women, how shall
    one name survive? Yet to this day and for ever, men will
    remember Deirdrê...."

        Fiona Macleod.


So long ago, that it was before the birth of our Lord, so says
tradition, there was born that

          "Morning star of loveliness,
    Unhappy Helen of a Western land,"

who is known to the Celts of Scotland as Darthool, to those of Ireland
as Deirdrê. As in the story of Helen, it is not easy, or even possible
in the story of Deirdrê, to disentangle the old, old facts of actual
history from the web of romantic fairy tale that time has woven about
them, yet so great is the power of Deirdrê, even unto this day, that
it has been the fond task of those men and women to whom the Gael owes
so much, to preserve, and to translate for posterity, the tragic
romance of Deirdrê the Beautiful and the Sons of Usna.

In many ancient manuscripts we get the story in more or less complete
form. In the Advocates' Library of Edinburgh, in the Glenmasan MS. we
get the best and the fullest version, while the oldest and the
shortest is to be found in the twelfth-century _Book of Leinster_.

But those who would revel in the old tale and have Deirdrê lead them
by the hand into the enchanted realm of the romance of misty, ancient
days of our Western Isles must go for help to Fiona Macleod, to
Alexander Carmichael, to Lady Gregory, to Dr. Douglas Hyde, to W. F.
Skene, to W. B. Yeats, to J. M. Synge, and to those others who, like
true descendants of the Druids, possess the power of unlocking the
entrance gates of the Green Islands of the Blest.

Conchubar, or Conor, ruled the kingdom of the Ultonians, now Ulster,
when Deirdrê was born in Erin. All the most famous warriors of his
time, heroes whose mighty deeds live on in legend, and whose title was
"The Champions of the Red Branch," he gathered round him, and all
through Erin and Alba rang the fame of the warlike Ultonians.

There came a day when Conor and his champions, gorgeous in their gala
dress of crimson tunic with brooches of inlaid gold and white-hooded
shirt embroidered in red gold, went to a feast in the house of one
called Felim. Felim was a bard, and because not only was his arm in
war strong and swift to strike, but because, in peace, his fingers
could draw the sweetest of music from his harp, he was dear to the
king. As they feasted, Conor beheld a dark shadow of horror and of
grief fall on the face of Cathbad, a Druid who had come in his train,
and saw that his aged eyes were gazing far into the Unseen. Speedily
he bade him tell him what evil thing it was that he saw, and Cathbad
turned to the childless Felim and told him that to his wife there was
about to be born a daughter, with eyes like stars that are mirrored
by night in the water, with lips red as the rowan berries and teeth
more white than pearls; with a voice more sweet than the music of
fairy harps. "A maiden fair, tall, long haired, for whom champions
will contend ... and mighty kings be envious of her lovely, faultless
form." For her sweet sake, he said, more blood should be spilt in Erin
than for generations and ages past, and many heroes and bright torches
of the Gaels should lose their lives. For love of her, three heroes of
eternal renown must give their lives away, the sea in which her starry
eyes should mirror themselves would be a sea of blood, and woe
unutterable should come on the sons of Erin. Then up spoke the lords
of the Red Branch, and grimly they looked at Felim the Harper:

"If the babe that thy wife is about to bear is to bring such evil upon
our land, better that thou shouldst shed her innocent blood ere she
spills the blood of our nation."

And Felim made answer:

"It is well spoken. Bitter it is for my wife and for me to lose a
child so beautiful, yet shall I slay her that my land may be saved
from such a doom."

But Conor, the king, spoke then, and because the witchery of the
perfect beauty and the magic charm of Deirdrê was felt by him even
before she was born, he said: "She shall not die. Upon myself I take
the doom. The child shall be kept apart from all men until she is of
an age to wed. Then shall I take her for my wife, and none shall dare
to contend for her."

His voice had barely ceased, when a messenger came to Felim to tell
him that a daughter was born to him, and on his heels came a
procession of chanting women, bearing the babe on a flower-decked
cushion. And all who saw the tiny thing, with milk-white skin, and
locks "more yellow than the western gold of the summer sun," looked on
her with the fear that even the bravest heart feels on facing the
Unknown. And Cathbad spoke: "Let Deirdrê be her name, sweet menace
that she is." And the babe gazed up with starry eyes at the
white-haired Druid as he chanted to her:

    "_Many will be jealous of your face, O flame of beauty;
    for your sake heroes shall go to exile. For there is
    harm in your face; it will bring banishment and death on
    the sons of kings. In your fate, O beautiful child, are
    wounds and ill-doings, and shedding of blood._

    "_You will have a little grave apart to yourself; you
    will be a tale of wonder for ever, Deirdrê._"

        Lady Gregory's Translation.

As Conor commanded, Deirdrê, the little "babe of destiny," was left
with her mother for only a month and a day, and then was sent with a
nurse and with Cathbad the Druid to a lonely island, thickly wooded,
and only accessible by a sort of causeway at low tide. Here she grew
into maidenhood, and each day became more fair. She had instruction
from Cathbad in religion and in all manner of wisdom, and it would
seem as though she also learned from him some of that mystical power
that enabled her to see things hidden from human eyes.

"Tell me," one day she asked her teacher, "who made the stars, the
firmament above, the earth, the flowers, both thee and me?"

And Cathbad answered: "God. But who God is, alas! no man can say."

Then Deirdrê, an impetuous child, seized the druidical staff from the
hand of Cathbad, broke it in two, and flung the pieces far out on the
water. "Ah, Cathbad!" she cried, "there shall come One in the dim
future for whom all your Druid spells and charms are naught."

Then seeing Cathbad hang his head, and a tear trickle down his face,
for he knew that the child spoke truth, the child, grieved at giving
pain to the friend whom she loved, threw her arms about the old man's
neck, and by her kisses strove to comfort him.

As Deirdrê grew older, Conor sent one from his court to educate her in
all that any queen should know. They called her the Lavarcam, which,
in our tongue, really means the Gossip, and she was one of royal blood
who belonged to a class that in those days had been trained to be
chroniclers, or story-tellers. The Lavarcam was a clever woman, and
she marvelled at the wondrous beauty of the child she came to teach,
and at her equally marvellous mind.

One winter day, when the snow lay deep, it came to pass that Deirdrê
saw lying on the snow a calf that had been slain for her food. The red
blood that ran from its neck had brought a black raven swooping down
upon the snow. And to Lavarcam Deirdrê said: "If there were a man who
had hair of the blackness of that raven, skin of the whiteness of the
snow, and cheeks as red as the blood that stains its whiteness, to him
should I give my heart."

And Lavarcam, without thought, made answer:

"One I know whose skin is whiter than the snow, whose cheeks are ruddy
as the blood that stained the snow, and whose hair is black and glossy
as the raven's wing. He has eyes of the darkest blue of the sky, and
head and shoulders is he above all the men of Erin."

"And what will be the name of that man, Lavarcam?" asked Deirdrê. "And
whence is he, and what his degree?"

And Lavarcam made answer that he of whom she spoke was Naoise, one of
the three sons of Usna, a great lord of Alba, and that these three
sons were mighty champions who had been trained at the famed military
school at Sgathaig[14] in the Isle of Skye.

Then said Deirdrê: "My love shall be given to none but Naoise, son of
Usna. To him shall it belong forever."

From that day forward, Naoise held kingship over the thoughts and
dreams of Deirdrê.

And when Lavarcam saw how deep her careless words had sunk into the
heart of the maiden, she grew afraid, and tried to think of a means by
which to undo the harm which, in her thoughtlessness, she had wrought.

Now Conor had made a law that none but Cathbad, Lavarcam, and the
nurse of Deirdrê should pass through the forest that led to her
hiding-place, and that none but they should look upon her until his
own eyes beheld her and he took her for his wife. But as Lavarcam one
day came from seeing Deirdrê, and from listening to her many eager
questions about Naoise, she met a swineherd, rough in looks and
speech, and clad in the pelt of a deer, and with him two rough
fellows, bondmen of the Ultonians, and to her quick mind there came a
plan. Thus she bade them follow her into the forbidden forest and
there to remain, by the side of a well, until they should hear the
bark of a fox and the cry of a jay. Then they were to walk slowly on
through the woods, speaking to none whom they might meet, and still
keeping silence when they were again out of the shadow of the trees.

Then Lavarcam sped back to Deirdrê and begged her to come with her to
enjoy the beauty of the woods. In a little, Lavarcam strayed away from
her charge, and soon the cry of a jay and the bark of a fox were
heard, and while Deirdrê still marvelled at the sounds that came so
close together, Lavarcam returned. Nor had she been back a minute
before three men came through the trees and slowly walked past, close
to where Lavarcam and Deirdrê were hidden.

"I have never seen men so near before," said Deirdrê. "Only from the
outskirts of the forest have I seen them very far away. Who are these
men, who bring no joy to my eyes?"

And Lavarcam made answer: "These are Naoise, Ardan, and Ainle--the
three sons of Usna."

But Deirdrê looked hard at Lavarcam, and scorn and laughter were in
her merry eyes.

"Then shall I have speech with Naoise, Ardan, and Ainle," she said,
and ere Lavarcam could stop her, she had flitted through the trees by
a path amongst the fern, and stood suddenly before the three men.

And the rough hinds, seeing such perfect loveliness, made very sure
that Deirdrê was one of the _sidhe_[15] and stared at her with the
round eyes and gaping mouths of wondering terror.

For a moment Deirdrê gazed at them. Then: "Are ye the Sons of Usna?"
she asked.

And when they stood like stocks, frightened and stupid, she lashed
them with her mockery, until the swineherd could no more, and blurted
out the whole truth to this most beautiful of all the world. Then,
very gently, like pearls from a silver string, the words fell from the
rowan-red lips of Deirdrê: "I blame thee not, poor swineherd," she
said, "and that thou mayst know that I deem thee a true man, I would
fain ask thee to do one thing for me."

And when the eyes of the herd met the eyes of Deirdrê, a soul was born
in him, and he knew things of which he never before had dreamed.

"If I can do one thing to please thee, that will I do," he said. "Aye,
and gladly pay for it with my life. Thenceforth my life is thine."

And Deirdrê said: "I would fain see Naoise, one of the Sons of Usna."

And once more the swineherd said: "My life is thine."

Then Deirdrê, seeing in his eyes a very beautiful thing, stooped and
kissed the swineherd on his weather-beaten, tanned forehead.

"Go, then," she said, "to Naoise. Tell him that I, Deirdrê, dream of
him all the night and think of him all the day, and that I bid him
meet me here to-morrow an hour before the setting of the sun."

The swineherd watched her flit into the shadows of the trees, and then
went on his way, through the snowy woods, that he might pay with his
life for the kiss that Deirdrê had given him.

Sorely puzzled was Lavarcam over the doings of Deirdrê that day, for
Deirdrê told her not a word of what had passed between her and the
swineherd. On the morrow, when she left her to go back to the court of
King Conor, she saw, as she drew near Emain Macha, where he stayed,
black wings that flapped over something that lay on the snow. At her
approach there rose three ravens, three kites, and three hoodie-crows,
and she saw that their prey was the body of the swineherd with gaping
spear-wounds all over him. Yet even then he looked happy. He had died
laughing, and there was still a smile on his lips. Faithfully had he
delivered his message, and when he had spoken of the beauty of
Deirdrê, rumour of his speech had reached the king, and the spears of
Conor's men had enabled him to make true the words he had said to
Deirdrê: "I will pay for it with my life." In this way was shed the
first blood of that great sea of blood that was spilt for the love of
Deirdrê, the Beauty of the World.

From where the swineherd lay, Lavarcam went to the camp of the Sons
of Usna, and to Naoise she told the story of the love that Deirdrê
bore him, and counselled him to come to the place where she was
hidden, and behold her beauty. And Naoise, who had seen how even a
rough clod of a hind could achieve the noble chivalry of a race of
kings for her dear sake, felt his heart throb within him. "I will
come," he said to Lavarcam.

Days passed, and Deirdrê waited, very sure that Naoise must come to
her at last. And one day she heard a song of magical sweetness coming
through the trees. Three voices sung the song, and it was as though
one of the _sidhe_ played a harp to cast a spell upon men. The voice
of Ainle, youngest of the Sons of Usna, was like the sweet upper
strings of the harp, that of Ardan the strings in the middle, and the
voice of Naoise was like the strings whose deep resonance can play
upon the hearts of warriors and move them to tears. Then Deirdrê knew
that she heard the voice of her beloved, and she sped to him as a bird
speeds to her mate. Even as Lavarcam had told her was Naoise, eldest
of the Sons of Usna, but no words had been able to tell Naoise of the
beauty of Deirdrê.

    "It was as though a sudden flood of sunshine burst forth
    in that place. For a woman came from the thicket more
    beautiful than any dream he had ever dreamed. She was
    clad in a saffron robe over white that was like the
    shining of the sun on foam of the sea, and this was
    claspt with great bands of yellow gold, and over her
    shoulders was the rippling flood of her hair, the sprays
    of which lightened into delicate fire, and made a mist
    before him, in the which he could see her eyes like two
    blue pools wherein purple shadows dreamed."

        Fiona Macleod.

From that moment Naoise "gave his love to Deirdrê above every other
creature," and their souls rushed together and were one for evermore.
It was for them the beginning of a perfect love, and so sure were they
of that love from the very first moment that it seemed as though they
must have been born loving one another.

Of that love they talked, of the anger of Conor when he knew that his
destined bride was the love of Naoise, and together they planned how
it was best for Deirdrê to escape from the furious wrath of the king
who desired her for his own.

Of a sudden, the hands of Naoise gripped the iron-pointed javelin that
hung by his side, and drove it into a place where the snow weighed
down the bracken.

"Is it a wolf?" cried Deirdrê.

And Naoise made answer: "Either a dead man, or the mark of where a man
has lain hidden thou wilt find under the bracken."

And when they went to look they found, like the clap of a hare, the
mark of where a man had lain hidden, and close beside the javelin that
was driven in the ground there lay a wooden-hilted knife.

Then said Naoise: "Well I knew that Conor would set a spy on my
tracks. Come with me now, Deirdrê, else may I lose thee forever."

And with a glad heart Deirdrê went with him who was to be her lord,
and Naoise took her to where his brothers awaited his coming. To
Deirdrê, both Ainle and Ardan swiftly gave their lifelong allegiance
and their love, but they were full of forebodings for her and for
Naoise because of the certain wrath of Conor, the king.

Then said Naoise: "Although harm should come, for her dear sake I am
willing to live in disgrace for the rest of my days."

And Ardan and Ainle made answer: "Of a certainty, evil will be of it,
yet though there be, thou shalt not be under disgrace as long as we
shall be alive. We will go with her to another country. There is not
in Erin a king who will not bid us welcome."

Then did the Sons of Usna decide to cross the Sea of Moyle, and in
their own land of Alba to find a happy sanctuary. That night they
fled, and with them took three times fifty men, three times fifty
women, three times fifty horses, and three times fifty greyhounds. And
when they looked back to where they had had their dwelling, they saw
red flames against the deep blue sky of the night, and knew that the
vengeance of Conor had already begun. And first they travelled round
Erin from Essa to Beinn Etair,[16] and then in a great black galley
they set sail, and Deirdrê had a heart light as the white-winged
sea-birds as the men pulled at the long oars and sang together a
rowing song, and she leaned on the strong arm of Naoise and saw the
blue coast-line of Erin fading into nothingness.

In the bay of Aros, on the eastern shores of the island of Mull, they
found their first resting-place, but there they feared treachery from
a lord of Appin. For the starry eyes of Deirdrê were swift to discern
evil that the eyes of the Sons of Usna could not see. Thus they fared
onward until they reached the great sea-loch of Etive, with hills
around it, and Ben Cruachan, its head in mist, towering above it like
a watchman placed there by Time, to wait and to watch over the people
of those silent hills and lonely glens until Time should give place to
his brother, Eternity.

Joy was in the hearts of the three Sons of Usna when they came back to
the home of their fathers. Usna was dead, but beyond the Falls of Lora
was still the great dun--the vitrified fort--which he had built for
himself and for those who should follow him.

For Deirdrê then began a time of perfect happiness. Naoise was her
heart, but very dear to her also were the brothers of Naoise, and each
of the three vied with one another in their acts of tender and loving
service. Their thrice fifty vassals had no love for Alba, and rejoiced
when their lord, Naoise, allowed them to return to Erin, but the Sons
of Usna were glad to have none to come between them and their serving
of Deirdrê, the queen of their hearts. Soon she came to know well each
little bay, each beach, and each little lonely glen of Loch Etive, for
the Sons of Usna did not always stay at the dun which had been their
father's, but went a-hunting up the loch. At various spots on the
shores of Etive they had camping places, and at Dail-an-eas[17] they
built for Deirdrê a sunny bower.

On a sloping bank above the waterfall they built the little nest,
thatched with the royal fern of the mountains, the red clay of the
pools, and with soft feathers from the breasts of birds. There she
could sit and listen to the murmur and drip of the clear water over
the mossy boulders, the splash of the salmon in the dark pools, and
see the distant silver of the loch. When the summer sun was hot on the
bog myrtle and heather, the hum of the wild bees would lull her to
sleep, and in autumn, when the bracken grew red and golden and the
rowan berries grew red as Deirdrê's lips, her keen eyes would see the
stags grazing high up among the grey boulders of the mist-crowned
mountains, and would warn the brothers of the sport awaiting them. The
crow of the grouse, the belling of stags, the bark of the hill-fox,
the swish of the great wings of the golden eagle, the song of birds,
the lilt of running water, the complaining of the wind through the
birches--all these things made music to Deirdrê, to whom all things
were dear.

"_Is tu mein na Dearshul agha_"--"The tenderness of heartsweet
Deirdrê"--so runs a line in an old, old Gaelic verse, and it is always
of her tenderness as well as her beauty that the old _Oea_ speak.

Sometimes she would hunt the red deer with Naoise and his brothers, up
the lonely glens, up through the clouds to the silent mountain tops,
and in the evening, when she was weary, her three loyal worshippers
would proudly bear her home upon their bucklers.

So the happy days passed away, and in Erin the angry heart of Conor
grew yet more angry when tidings came to him of the happiness of
Deirdrê and the Sons of Usna. Rumour came to him that the king of
Alba had planned to come against Naoise, to slay him, and to take
Deirdrê for his wife, but that ere he could come the Sons of Usna and
Deirdrê had sailed yet further north in their galley, and that there,
in the land of his mother, Naoise ruled as a king. And not only on
Loch Etive, but on Loch Awe and Loch Fyne, Loch Striven, Loch Ard,
Loch Long, Loch Lomond and all along the sea-loch coast, the fame of
the Sons of Usna spread, and the wonder of the beauty of Deirdrê,
fairest of women.

And ever the hatred of Conor grew, until one day there came into his
mind a plan of evil by which his burning thirst for revenge might be
handsomely assuaged.

He made, therefore, a great feast, at which all the heroes of the Red
Branch were present. When he had done them every honour, he asked them
if they were content. As one man: "Well content indeed!" answered
they.

"And that is what I am not," said the king. Then with the guile of
fair words he told them that to him it was great sorrow that the three
heroes, with whose deeds the Western Isles and the whole of the north
and west of Alba were ringing, should not be numbered amongst his
friends, sit at his board in peace and amity, and fight for the
Ultonians like all the other heroes of the Red Branch.

"They took from me the one who would have been my wife," he said, "yet
even that I can forgive, and if they would return to Erin, glad would
my welcome be."

At these words there was great rejoicing amongst the lords of the Red
Branch and all those who listened, and Conor, glad at heart, said,
"My three best champions shall go to bring them back from their
exile," and he named Conall the Victorious, Cuchulainn, and Fergus,
the son of Rossa the Red. Then secretly he called Conall to him and
asked him what he would do if he were sent to fetch the Sons of Usna,
and, in spite of his safe-conduct, they were slain when they reached
the land of the Ultonians. And Conall made answer that should such a
shameful thing come to pass he would slay with his own hand all the
traitor dogs. Then he sent for Cuchulainn, and to him put the same
question, and, in angry scorn, the young hero replied that even Conor
himself would not be safe from his vengeance were such a deed of black
treachery to be performed.

"Well did I know thou didst bear me no love," said Conor, and black
was his brow.

He called for Fergus then, and Fergus, sore troubled, made answer that
were there to be such a betrayal, the king alone would be held sacred
from his vengeance.

Then Conor gladly gave Fergus command to go to Alba as his emissary,
and to fetch back with him the three brothers and Deirdrê the
Beautiful.

"Thy name of old was Honeymouth," he said, "so I know well that with
guile thou canst bring them to Erin. And when thou shalt have returned
with them, send them forward, but stay thyself at the house of
Borrach. Borrach shall have warning of thy coming."

This he said, because to Fergus and to all the other of the Red
Branch, a _geasa_, or pledge, was sacrosanct. And well he knew that
Fergus had as one of his _geasa_ that he would never refuse an
invitation to a feast.

Next day Fergus and his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne the Red,
set out in their galley for the dun of the Sons of Usna on Loch Etive.

The day before their hurried flight from Erin, Ainle and Ardan had
been playing chess in their dun with Conor, the king. The board was of
fair ivory, and the chessmen were of red-gold, wrought in strange
devices. It had come from the mysterious East in years far beyond the
memory of any living man, and was one of the dearest of Conor's
possessions. Thus, when Ainle and Ardan carried off the chess-board
with them in their flight, after the loss of Deirdrê, that was the
loss that gave the king the greatest bitterness. Now it came to pass
that as Naoise and Deirdrê were sitting in front of their dun, the
little waves of Loch Etive lapping up on the seaweed, yellow as the
hair of Deirdrê, far below, and playing chess at this board, they
heard a shout from the woods down by the shore where the hazels and
birches grew thick.

"That is the voice of a man of Erin!" said Naoise, and stopped in his
game to listen.

But Deirdrê said, very quickly: "Not so! It is the voice of a Gael of
Alba."

Yet so she spoke that she might try to deceive her own heart, that
even then was chilled by the black shadow of an approaching evil. Then
came another shout, and yet a third. And when they heard the third
shout, there was no doubt left in their minds, for they all knew the
voice for that of Fergus, the son of Rossa the Red. And when Ardan
hastened down to the harbour to greet him, Deirdrê confessed to Naoise
why she had refused at first to own that it was a voice from Erin that
she heard.

"I saw in a dream last night," she said, "three birds that flew hither
from Emain Macha, carrying three sips of honey in their beaks. The
honey they left with us, but took away three sips of blood."

And Naoise said: "What then, best beloved, dost thou read from this
dream of thine?"

And Deirdrê said: "I read that Fergus comes from Conor with honeyed
words of peace, but behind his treacherous words lies death."

As they spake, Ardan and Fergus and his following climbed up the
height where the bog-myrtle and the heather and sweet fern yielded
their sweetest incense as they were wounded under their firm tread.

And when Fergus stood before Deirdrê and Naoise, the man of her heart,
he told them of Conor's message, and of the peace and the glory that
awaited them in Erin if they would but listen to the words of welcome
that he brought.

Then said Naoise: "I am ready." But his eyes dared not meet the
sea-blue eyes of Deirdrê, his queen.

"Knowest thou that my pledge is one of honour?" asked Fergus.

"I know it well," said Naoise.

So in joyous feasting was that night spent, and only over the heart
of Deirdrê hung that black cloud of sorrow to come, of woe
unspeakable.

When the golden dawn crept over the blue hills of Loch Etive, and the
white-winged birds of the sea swooped and dived and cried in the
silver waters, the galley of the Sons of Usna set out to sea.

And Deirdrê, over whom hung a doom she had not the courage to name,
sang a song at parting:

THE LAY OF DEIRDRE

    "Beloved land, that Eastern land,
    Alba, with its wonders.
    O that I might not depart from it,
    But that I go with Naoise.

    Beloved is Dunfidgha and Dun Fin;
    Beloved the Dun above them;
    Beloved is Innisdraighende;[18]
    And beloved Dun Suibhne.[19]

    Coillchuan! O Coillchuan!
    Where Ainnle would, alas! resort;
    Too short, I deem, was then my stay
    With Ainnle in Oirir Alban.

    Glenlaidhe![20] O Glenlaidhe!
    I used to sleep by its soothing murmur;
    Fish, and flesh of wild boar and badger,
    Was my repast in Glenlaidhe.

    Glenmasan! O Glenmasan![21]
    High its herbs, fair its boughs.
    Solitary was the place of our repose
    On grassy Invermasan.

    Gleneitche![22] O Gleneitche!
    There was raised my earliest home.
    Beautiful its woods on rising,
    When the sun struck on Gleneitche.

    Glen Urchain![23] O Glen Urchain!
    It was the straight glen of smooth ridges,
    Not more joyful was a man of his age
    Than Naoise in Glen Urchain.

    Glendaruadh![24] O Glendaruadh!
    My love each man of its inheritance.
    Sweet the voice of the cuckoo, on bending bough,
    On the hill above Glendaruadh.

    Beloved is Draighen and its sounding shore;
    Beloved is the water o'er the pure sand.
    O that I might not depart from the east,
    But that I go with my beloved!"

        _Translated by W. F. Skene, LL.D._

Thus they fared across the grey-green sea betwixt Alba and Erin, and
when Ardan and Ainle and Naoise heard the words of the song of
Deirdrê, on their hearts also descended the strange sorrow of an evil
thing from which no courage could save them.

At Ballycastle, opposite Rathlin Island, where a rock on the shore
("Carraig Uisneach") still bears the name of the Sons of Usna, Fergus
and the returned exiles landed. And scarcely were they out of sight of
the shore when a messenger came to Fergus, bidding him to a feast of
ale at the dun of Borrach. Then Fergus, knowing well that in this was
the hand of Conor and that treachery was meant, reddened all over with
anger and with shame. But yet he dared not break his _geasa_, even
although by holding to it the honour he had pledged to the three
brothers for their safe-conduct and that of Deirdrê was dragged
through the mire. He therefore gave them his sons for escort and went
to the feast at the dun of Borrach, full well knowing that Deirdrê
spoke truth when she told him sadly that he had sold his honour. The
gloomy forebodings that had assailed the heart of Deirdrê ere they had
left Loch Etive grew ever the stronger as they went southwards. She
begged Naoise to let them go to some place of safety and there wait
until Fergus had fulfilled his _geasa_ and could rejoin them and go
with them to Emain Macha. But the Sons of Usna, strong in the
knowledge of their own strength, and simply trustful of the pledged
word of Conor and of Fergus, laughed at her fears, and continued on
their way. Dreams of dread portent haunted her sleep, and by daytime
her eyes in her white face looked like violets in the snow. She saw a
cloud of blood always hanging over the beautiful Sons of Usna, and all
of them she saw, and Illann the Fair, with their heads shorn off, gory
and awful. Yet no pleading words could prevail upon Naoise. His fate
drove him on.

"To Emain Macha we must go, my beloved," he said. "To do other than
this would be to show that we have fear, and fear we have none."

Thus at last did they arrive at Emain Macha, and with courteous
welcome Conor sent them word that the house of the heroes of the Red
Branch was to be theirs that night. And although the place the king
had chosen for their lodgment confirmed all the intuitions and
forebodings of Deirdrê, the evening was spent by in good cheer, and
Deirdrê had the joy of a welcome there from her old friend Lavarcam.
For to Lavarcam Conor had said: "I would have thee go to the House of
the Red Branch and bring me back tidings if the beauty of Deirdrê has
waned, or if she is still the most beautiful of all women."

And when Lavarcam saw her whom she had loved as a little child,
playing chess with her husband at the board of ivory and gold, she
knew that love had made the beauty of Deirdrê blossom, and that she
was now more beautiful than the words of any man or woman could tell.
Nor was it possible for her to be a tool for Conor when she looked in
the starry eyes of Deirdrê, and so she poured forth warning of the
treachery of Conor, and the Sons of Usna knew that there was truth in
the dreams of her who was the queen of their hearts. And even as
Lavarcam ceased there came to the eyes of Deirdrê a vision such as
that of Cathbad the Druid on the night of her birth.

    "I see three torches quenched this night," she said.
    "And these three torches are the Three Torches of Valour
    among the Gael, and their names are the names of the
    Sons of Usna. And more bitter still is this sorrow,
    because that the Red Branch shall ultimately perish
    through it, and Uladh itself be overthrown, and blood
    fall this way and that as the whirled rains of
    winter."

        Fiona Macleod.

Then Lavarcam went her way, and returned to the palace at Emain Macha
and told Conor that the cruel winds and snows of Alba had robbed
Deirdrê of all her loveliness, so that she was no more a thing to be
desired. But Naoise had said to Deirdrê when she foretold his doom:
"Better to die for thee and for thy deathless beauty than to have
lived without knowledge of thee and thy love," and it may have been
that some memory of the face of Deirdrê, when she heard these words,
dwelt in the eyes of Lavarcam and put quick suspicion into the evil
heart of the king. For when Lavarcam had gone forth, well pleased that
she had saved her darling, Conor sent a spy--a man whose father and
three brothers had fallen in battle under the sword of Naoise--that he
might see Deirdrê and confirm or contradict the report of Lavarcam.
And when this man reached the house of the Red Branch, he found that
the Sons of Usna had been put on their guard, for all the doors and
windows were barred. Thus he climbed to a narrow upper window and
peered in. There, lying on the couches, the chess-board of ivory and
gold between them, were Naoise and Deirdrê. So beautiful were they,
that they were as the deathless gods, and as they played that last
game of their lives, they spoke together in low voices of love that
sounded like the melody of a harp in the hands of a master player.
Deirdrê was the first to see the peering face with the eyes that
gloated on her loveliness. No word said she, but silently made the
gaze of Naoise follow her own, even as he held a golden chessman in
his hand, pondering a move. Swift as a stone from a sling the chessman
was hurled, and the man fell back to the ground with his eyeball
smashed, and found his way to Emain Macha as best he could, shaking
with agony and snarling with lust for revenge. Vividly he painted for
the king the picture of the most beautiful woman on earth as she
played at the chess-board that he held so dear, and the rage of Conor
that had smouldered ever since that day when he learned that Naoise
had stolen Deirdrê from him, flamed up into madness. With a bellow
like that of a wounded bull, he called upon the Ultonians to come with
him to the House of the Red Branch, to burn it down, and to slay all
those within it with the sword, save only Deirdrê, who was to be saved
for a more cruel fate.

In the House of the Red Branch, Deirdrê and the three brothers and the
two sons of Fergus heard the shouts of the Ultonians and knew that the
storm was about to break. But, calm as rocks against which the angry
waves beat themselves in vain, sat those whose portion at dawn was to
be cruel death. And Naoise and Ainle played chess, with hands that did
not tremble. At the first onslaught, Buinne the Red, son of Fergus,
sallied forth, quenched the flames, and drove back the Ultonians with
great slaughter. But Conor called to him to parley and offered him a
bribe of land, and Buinne, treacherous son of a treacherous father,
went over to the enemy. His brother, Illann the Fair, filled with
shame, did what he could to make amends. He went forth, and many
hundreds of the besieging army fell before him, ere death stayed his
loyal hand. At his death the Ultonians again fired the house, and
first Ardan and then Ainle left their chess for a fiercer game, and
glutted their sword blades with the blood of their enemies. Last came
the turn of Naoise. He kissed Deirdrê, and drank a drink, and went out
against the men of Conor, and where his brothers had slain hundreds,
a thousand fell before his sword.

Then fear came into the heart of Conor, for he foresaw that against
the Sons of Usna no man could prevail, save by magic. Thus he sent for
Cathbad the Druid, who was even then very near death, and the old man
was carried on a litter to the House of the Red Branch, from which the
flames were leaping, and before which the dead lay in heaps.

And Conor besought him to help him to subdue the Sons of Usna ere they
should have slain every Ultonian in the land. So by his magic Cathbad
raised a hedge of spears round the house. But Naoise, Ardan, and
Ainle, with Deirdrê in their centre, sheltered by their shields, burst
suddenly forth from the blazing house, and cut a way for themselves
through the hedge as though they sheared green wheat. And, laughing
aloud, they took a terrible toll of lives from the Ultonians who would
have withstood them. Then again the Druid put forth his power, and a
noise like the noise of many waters was in the ears of all who were
there. So suddenly the magic flood arose that there was no chance of
escape for the Sons of Usna. Higher it mounted, ever higher, and
Naoise held Deirdrê on his shoulder, and smiled up in her eyes as the
water rose past his middle. Then suddenly as it had come, the flood
abated, and all was well with the Ultonians who had sheltered on a
rising ground. But the Sons of Usna found themselves entrapped in a
morass where the water had been. Conor, seeing them in his hands at
last, bade some of his warriors go and take them. But for shame no
Ultonian would go, and it was a man from Norway who walked along a dry
spit of land to where they stood, sunk deep in the green bog. "Slay me
first!" called Ardan as he drew near, sword in hand. "I am the
youngest, and, who knows, my death may change the tides of fate!"

And Ainle also craved that death might be dealt to him the first. But
Naoise held out his own sword, "The Retaliator," to the executioner.

"Mannanan, the son of Lîr, gave me my good sword," he said. "With it
strike my dear brothers and me one blow only as we stand here like
three trees planted in the soil. Then shall none of us know the grief
and shame of seeing the other beheaded." And because it was hard for
any man to disobey the command of Naoise, a king of men, the Norseman
reached out his hand for the sword. But Deirdrê sprang from the
shoulder of Naoise and would have killed the man ere he struck.
Roughly he threw her aside, and with one blow he shore off the heads
of the three greatest heroes of Alba.

For a little while there was a great stillness there, like the silence
before the coming of a storm. And then all who had beheld the end of
the fair and noble Sons of Usna broke into great lamentation. Only
Conor stood silent, gazing at the havoc he had wrought. To Cuchulainn,
the mighty champion, a good man and a true, Deirdrê fled, and begged
him to protect her for the little span of life that she knew yet
remained to her. And with him she went to where the head of Naoise
lay, and tenderly she cleansed it from blood and from the stains of
strife and stress, and smoothed the hair that was black as a raven's
wing, and kissed the cold lips again and again. And as she held it
against her white breast, as a mother holds a little child, she
chanted for Naoise, her heart, and for his brothers, a lament that
still lives in the language of the Gael.

    "Is it honour that ye love, brave and chivalrous Ultonians?
    Or is the word of a base king better than noble truth?
    Of a surety ye must be glad, who have basely slain honour
    In slaying the three noblest and best of your brotherhood.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Let now my beauty that set all this warring aflame,
    Let now my beauty be quenched as a torch that is spent--
    For here shall I quench it, here, where my loved one lies,
    A torch shall it be for him still through the darkness of death."

        Fiona Macleod's Translation.

Then, at the bidding of Cuchulainn, the Ultonian, three graves were
dug for the brothers, but the grave of Naoise was made wider than the
others, and when he was placed in it, standing upright, with his head
placed on his shoulders, Deirdrê stood by him and held him in her
white arms, and murmured to him of the love that was theirs and of
which not Death itself could rob them. And even as she spoke to him,
merciful Death took her, and together they were buried. At that same
hour a terrible cry was heard: "_The Red Branch perisheth! Uladh
passeth! Uladh passeth!_" and when he had so spoken, the soul of
Cathbad the Druid passed away.

To the land of the Ultonians there came on the morrow a mighty host,
and the Red Branch was wiped out for ever. Emain Macha was cast into
ruins, and Conor died in a madness of sorrow.

And still, in that land of Erin where she died, still in the lonely
cleuchs and glens, and up the mist-hung mountain sides of Loch Etive,
where she knew her truest happiness, we can sometimes almost hear the
wind sighing the lament: "Deirdrê the beautiful is dead ... is dead!"

    "I hear a voice crying, crying, crying: is it the wind
    I hear, crying its old weary cry time out of mind?

    _The grey wind weeps, the grey wind weeps, the grey wind weeps:_
    _Dust on her breast, dust on her eyes, the grey wind weeps._"

        Fiona Macleod.

THE ILIAD OF HOMER



BOOK I.

How Agamemnon and Achilles fell out at the siege of Troy; and Achilles
withdrew himself from battle, and won from Zeus a pledge that his wrong
should be avenged on Agamemnon and the Achaians.


Sing, goddess, the wrath of Achilles Peleus’ son, the ruinous wrath
that brought on the Achaians woes innumerable, and hurled down into
Hades many strong souls of heroes, and gave their bodies to be a prey
to dogs and all winged fowls; and so the counsel of Zeus wrought out
its accomplishment from the day when first strife parted Atreides king
of men and noble Achilles.

Who among the gods set the twain at strife and variance? Apollo, the
son of Leto and of Zeus; for he in anger at the king sent a sore plague
upon the host, so that the folk began to perish, because Atreides had
done dishonour to Chryses the priest. For the priest had come to the
Achaians’ fleet ships to win his daughter’s freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling; and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff; and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host; “Ye sons of Atreus and all ye well-greaved Achaians, now may the
gods that dwell in the mansions of Olympus grant you to lay waste the
city of Priam, and to fare happily homeward; only set ye my dear child
free, and accept the ransom in reverence to the son of Zeus,
far-darting Apollo.”

Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest and
accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away, and laid stern
charge upon him, saying: “Let me not find thee, old man, amid the
hollow ships, whether tarrying now or returning again hereafter, lest
the staff and fillet of the god avail thee naught. And her will I not
set free; nay, ere that shall old age come on her in our house, in
Argos, far from her native land, where she shall ply the loom and serve
my couch. But depart, provoke me not, that thou mayest the rather go in
peace.”

So said he, and the old man was afraid and obeyed his word, and fared
silently along the shore of the loud-sounding sea. Then went that aged
man apart and prayed aloud to king Apollo, whom Leto of the fair locks
bare: “Hear me, god of the silver bow, that standest over Chryse and
holy Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might, O Smintheus! If ever I built
a temple gracious in thine eyes, or if ever I burnt to thee fat flesh
of thighs of bulls or goats, fulfil thou this my desire; let the
Danaans pay by thine arrows for my tears.”

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him, and came down from
the peaks of Olympus wroth at heart, bearing on his shoulders his bow
and covered quiver. And the arrows clanged upon his shoulders in wrath,
as the god moved; and he descended like to night. Then he sate him
aloof from the ships, and let an arrow fly; and there was heard a dread
clanging of the silver bow. First did the assail the mules and fleet
dogs, but afterward, aiming at the men his piercing dart, he smote; and
the pyres of the dead burnt continually in multitude.

Now for nine days ranged the god’s shafts through the host; but on the
tenth Achilles summoned the folk to assembly, for in his mind did
goddess Hera of white arms put the thought, because she had pity on the
Danaans when she beheld them perishing. Now when they had gathered and
were met in assembly, then Achilles fleet of foot stood up and spake
among them: “Son of Atreus, now deem I that we shall return wandering
home again—if verily we might escape death—if war at once and
pestilence must indeed ravage the Achaians. But come, let us now
inquire of some soothsayer or priest, yea, or an interpreter of
dreams—seeing that a dream too is of Zeus—who shall say wherefore
Phoebus Apollo is so wroth, whether he blame us by reason of vow or
hecatomb; if perchance he would accept the savour of lambs or
unblemished goats, and so would take away the pestilence from us.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up before them Kalchas
son of Thestor, most excellent far of augurs, who knew both things that
were and that should be and that had been before, and guided the ships
of the Achaians to Ilios by his soothsaying that Phoebus Apollo
bestowed on him. He of good intent made harangue and spake amid them:
“Achilles, dear to Zeus, thou biddest me tell the wrath of Apollo, the
king that smiteth afar. Therefore will I speak; but do thou make
covenant with me, and swear that verily with all thy heart thou wilt
aid me both by word and deed. For of a truth I deem that I shall
provoke one that ruleth all the Argives with might, and whom the
Achaians obey. For a king is more of might when he is wroth with a
meaner man; even though for the one day he swallow his anger, yet doth
he still keep his displeasure thereafter in his breast till he
accomplish it. Consider thou, then, if thou wilt hold me safe.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and spake to him: “Yea, be of
good courage, speak whatever soothsaying thou knowest; for by Apollo
dear to Zeus, him by whose worship thou, O Kalchas, declarest thy
soothsaying to the Danaans, not even if thou mean Agamemnon, that now
avoweth him to be greatest far of the Achaians.”

Then was the noble seer of good courage, and spake: “Neither by reason
of a vow is he displeased, nor for any hecatomb, but for his priest’s
sake to whom Agamemnon did despite, and set not his daughter free and
accepted not the ransom; therefore hath the Far-darter brought woes
upon us, yea, and will bring. Nor will he ever remove the loathly
pestilence from the Danaans till we have given the bright-eyed damsel
to her father, unbought, unransomed, and carried a holy hecatomb to
Chryse; then might we propitiate him to our prayer.”

So said he and sate him down, and there stood up before them the hero
son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, sore displeased; and his dark
heart within him was greatly filled with anger, and his eyes were like
flashing fire. To Kalchas first spake he with look of ill: “Thou seer
of evil, never yet hast thou told me the thing that is pleasant. Evil
is ever the joy of thy heart to prophesy, but never yet didst thou tell
any good matter nor bring to pass. And now with soothsaying thou makest
harangue among the Danaans, how that the Far-darter bringeth woes upon
them because, forsooth, I would not take the goodly ransom of the
damsel Chryseis, seeing I am the rather fain to keep her own self
within mine house. Yea, I prefer her before Klytaimnestra my wedded
wife; in no wise is she lacking beside her, neither in favour nor
stature, nor wit nor skill. Yet for all this will I give her back, if
that is better; rather would I see my folk whole than perishing. Only
make ye me ready a prize of honour forthwith, lest I alone of all the
Argives be disprized, which thing beseemeth not; for ye all behold how
my prize is departing from me.”

To him then made answer fleet-footed goodly Achilles: “Most noble son
of Atreus, of all men most covetous, how shall the great-hearted
Achaians give thee a meed of honour? We know naught of any wealth of
common store, but what spoil soe’er we took from captured cities hath
been apportioned, and it beseemeth not to beg all this back from the
folk. Nay, yield thou the damsel to the god, and we Achaians will pay
thee back threefold and fourfold, if ever Zeus grant us to sack some
well-walled town of Troy-land.”

To him lord Agamemnon made answer and said: “Not in this wise, strong
as thou art, O godlike Achilles, beguile thou me by craft; thou shalt
not outwit me nor persuade me. Dost thou wish, that thou mayest keep
thy meed of honour, for me to sit idle in bereavement, and biddest me
give her back? Nay, if the great-hearted Achaians will give me a meed
suited to my mind, that the recompense be equal—but if they give it
not, then I myself will go and take a meed of honour, thine be it or
Aias’, or Odysseus’ that I will take unto me; wroth shall he be to
whomsoever I come. But for this we will take counsel hereafter; now let
us launch a black ship on the great sea, and gather picked oarsmen, and
set therein a hecatomb, and embark Chryseis of the fair cheeks herself,
and let one of our counsellors be captain, Aias or Idomeneus or goodly
Odysseus, or thou, Peleides, most redoubtable of men, to do sacrifice
for us and propitiate the Far-darter.”

Then Achilles fleet of foot looked at him scowling and said: “Ah me,
thou clothed in shamelessness, thou of crafty mind, how shall any
Achaian hearken to thy bidding with all his heart, be it to go a
journey or to fight the foe amain? Not by reason of the Trojan spearmen
came I hither to fight, for they have not wronged me; never did they
harry mine oxen nor my horses, nor ever waste my harvest in deep-soiled
Phthia, the nurse of men; seeing there lieth between us long space of
shadowy mountains and sounding sea; but thee, thou shameless one,
followed we hither to make thee glad, by earning recompense at the
Trojans’ hands for Menelaos and for thee, thou dog-face! All this thou
threatenest thyself to take my meed of honour, wherefor I travailed
much, and the sons of the Achaians gave it me. Never win I meed like
unto thine, when the Achaians sack any populous citadel of Trojan men;
my hands bear the brunt of furious war, but when the apportioning
cometh then is thy meed far ampler, and I betake me to the ships with
some small thing, yet my own, when I have fought to weariness. Now will
I depart to Phthia, seeing it is far better to return home on my beaked
ships; nor am I minded here in dishonour to draw thee thy fill of
riches and wealth.”

Then Agamemnon king of men made answer to him “yea, flee, if thy soul
be set thereon. It is not I that beseech thee to tarry for my sake; I
have others by my side that shall do me honour, and above all Zeus,
lord of counsel. Most hateful art thou to me of all kings, fosterlings
of Zeus; thou ever lovest strife and wars and fightings. Though thou be
very strong, yet that I ween is a gift to thee of God. Go home with thy
ships and company and lord it among thy Myrmidons; I reck not aught of
thee nor care I for thine indignation; and all this shall be my threat
to thee: seeing Phoebus Apollo bereaveth me of Chryseis, her with my
ship and my company will I send back; and mine own self will I go to
thy hut and take Briseis of the fair cheeks, even that thy meed of
honour, that thou mayest well know how far greater I am than thou, and
so shall another hereafter abhor to match his words with mine and rival
me to my face.”

So said he, and grief came upon Peleus’ son, and his heart within his
shaggy breast was divided in counsel, whether to draw his keen blade
from his thigh and set the company aside and so slay Atreides, or to
assuage his anger and curb his soul. While yet he doubted thereof in
heart and soul, and was drawing his great sword from his sheath, Athene
came to him from heaven, sent forth of the white-armed goddess Hera,
whose heart loved both alike and had care for them. She stood behind
Peleus’ son and caught him by his golden hair, to him only visible, and
of the rest no man beheld her. Then Achilles marvelled, and turned him
about, and straightway knew Pallas Athene; and terribly shone her eyes.
He spake to her winged words, and said: “Why now art thou come hither,
thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus? Is it to behold the insolence of
Agamemnon, son of Atreus. Yea, I will tell thee that I deem shall even
be brought to pass: by his own haughtinesses shall he soon lose his
life.”

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene spake to him again: “I came from
heaven to stay thine anger, if perchance thou wilt hearken to me, being
sent forth if the white-armed goddess Hera, that loveth you twain alike
and careth for you. Go to now, cease from strife, and let not thine
hand draw the sword; yet with words indeed revile him, even as it shall
come to pass. For thus will I say to thee, and so it shall be
fulfilled; hereafter shall goodly gifts come to thee, yea in threefold
measure, by reason of this despite; hold thou thine hand, and hearken
to us.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to her: “Goddess, needs
must a man observe the saying of you twain, even though he be very
wroth at heart; for so is the better way. Whosoever obeyeth the gods,
to him they gladly hearken.”

He said, and stayed his heavy hand on the silver hilt, and thrust the
great Sword back into the sheath, and was not disobedient to the saying
of Athene; and she forthwith was departed to Olympus, to the other gods
in the palace of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then Peleus’ son spake again with bitter words to Atreus’ son, and in
no wise ceased from anger: “Thou heavy with wine, thou with face of dog
and heart of deer, never didst thou take courage to arm for battle
among thy folk or to lay ambush with the princes of the Achaians; that
to thee were even as death. Far better booteth it, for sooth, to seize
for thyself the meed of honour of every man through the wide host of
the Achaians that speaketh contrary to thee. Folk-devouring king!
seeing thou rulest men of naught; else were this despite, thou son of
Atreus, thy last. But I will speak my word to thee, and swear a mighty
oath therewith: verily by this staff that shall no more put forth leaf
or twig, seeing it hath for ever left its trunk among the hills,
neither shall it grow green again, because the axe hath stripped it of
leaves and bark; and now the sons of the Achaians that exercise
judgment bear it in their hands, even they that by Zeus’ command watch
over the traditions—so shall this be a mighty oath in thine eyes—verily
shall longing for Achilles come hereafter upon the sons of the Achaians
one and all; and then wilt thou in no wise avail to save them, for all
thy grief, when multitudes fall dying before manslaying Hector. Then
shalt thou tear thy heart within thee for anger that thou didst in no
wise honour the best of the Achaians.”

So said Peleides and dashed to earth the staff studded with golden
nails, and himself sat down; and over against him Atreides waxed
furious. Then in their midst rose up Nestor, pleasant of speech, the
clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, he from whose tongue flowed
discourse sweeter than honey. Two generations of mortal men already had
he seen perish, that had been of old time born and nurtured with him in
goodly Pylos, and he was king among the third. He of good intent made
harangue to them and said: “Alas, of a truth sore lamentation cometh
upon the land of Achaia. Verily Priam would be glad and Priam’s sons,
and all the Trojans would have great joy of heart, were they to hear
all this tale of strife between you twain that are chiefest of the
Danaans in counsel and chiefest in battle. Nay, hearken to me; ye are
younger both than I. Of old days held I converse with better men even
than you, and never did they make light of me. Yea, I never beheld such
warriors, nor shall behold, as were Peirithoos and Dryas shepherd of
the host and Kaineus and Exadios and godlike Polyphemos [and Theseus
son of Aigeus, like to the Immortals]. Mightiest of growth were they of
all men upon the earth; mightiest they were and with the mightiest
fought they, even the wild tribes of the Mountain caves, and destroyed
them utterly. And with these held I converse, being come from Pylos,
from a distant land afar; for of themselves they summoned me. So I
played my part in fight; and with them could none of men that are now
on earth do battle. And they laid to heart my counsels and hearkened to
my voice. Even so hearken ye also, for better is it to hearken. Neither
do thou, though thou art very great, seize from him his damsel, but
leave her as she was given at the first by the sons of the Achaians to
be a meed of honour; nor do thou, son of Peleus, think to strive with a
king, might against might; seeing that no common honour pertaineth to a
sceptred king to whom Zeus apportioneth glory. Though thou be strong,
and a goddess mother bare thee, yet his is the greater place, for he is
king over more. And thou, Atreides, abate thy fury; nay, it is even I
that beseech thee to let go thine anger with Achilles, who is made unto
all the Achaians a mighty bulwark of evil war.”

Then lord Agamemnon answered and said: “Yea verily, old man, all this
thou sayest is according unto right. But this fellow would be above all
others, he would be lord of all and king among all and captain to all;
wherein I deem none will hearken to him. Though the immortal gods made
him a spearman, do they therefore put revilings in his mouth for him to
utter?”

Then goodly Achilles brake in on him and answered: “Yea, for I should
be called coward and man of naught, if I yield to thee in every matter,
howsoe’er thou bid. To others give now thine orders, not to me [play
master; for thee I deem that I shall no more obey]. This, moreover,
will I say to thee, and do thou lay it to thy heart. Know that not by
violence will I strive for the damsel’s sake, neither with thee nor any
other; ye gave and ye have taken away. But of all else that is mine
beside my fleet black ship, thereof shalt thou not take anything or
bear it away against my will. Yea, go to now, make trial, that all
these may see; forthwith thy dark blood shall gush about my spear.”

Now when the twain had thus finished the battle of violent words, they
stood up and dissolved the assembly beside the Achaian ships. Peleides
went his way to his huts and trim ships with Menoitios’ son [Patroklos]
and his company; and Atreides launched a fleet ship on the sea, and
picked twenty oarsmen therefor, and embarked the hecatomb for the god,
and brought Chryseis of the fair cheeks and set her therein; and
Odysseus of many devices went to be their captain.

So these embarked and sailed over the wet ways; and Atreides bade the
folk purify themselves. So they purified themselves, and cast the
defilements into the sea and did sacrifice to Apollo, even unblemished
hecatombs of bulls and goats, along the shore of the unvintaged sea;
and the sweet savour arose to heaven eddying amid the smoke.

Thus were they busied throughout the host; but Agamemnon ceased not
from the strife wherewith he threatened Achilles at the first; he spake
to Talthybios and Eurybates that were his heralds and nimble squires:
“Go ye to the tent of Achilles Peleus’ son, and take Briseis of the
fair cheeks by the hand and lead her hither; and if he give her not,
then will I myself go, and more with me, and seize her; and that will
be yet more grievous for him.”

So saying he sent them forth, and laid stern charge upon them.
Unwillingly went they along the beach of the unvintaged sea, and came
to the huts and ships of the Myrmidons. Him found they sitting beside
his hut and black ship; nor when he saw them was Achilles glad. So they
in dread and reverence of the king stood, and spake to him no word, nor
questioned him. But he knew in his heart, and spake to them: “All hail,
ye heralds, messengers of Zeus and men, come near; ye are not guilty in
my sight, but Agamemnon that sent you for the sake of the damsel
Briseis. Go now, heaven-sprung Patroklos, bring forth the damsel, and
give them her to lead away. Moreover, let the twain themselves be my
witnesses before the face of the blessed gods and mortal men, yea and
of him, that king untoward, against the day when there cometh need of
me hereafter to save them all from shameful wreck. Of a truth he raveth
with baleful mind, and hath not knowledge to look before and after,
that so his Achaians might battle in safety beside their ships.”

So said he, and Patroklos hearkened to his dear comrade, and led forth
from the hut Briseis of the fair cheeks, and gave them her to lead
away. So these twain took their way back along the Achaians’ ships, and
with them went the woman all unwilling. Then Achilles wept anon, and
sat him down apart, aloof from his comrades on the beach of the grey
sea, gazing across the boundless main; he stretched forth his hands and
prayed instantly to his dear mother: “Mother, seeing thou didst of a
truth bear me to so brief span of life, honour at the least ought the
Olympian to have granted me, even Zeus that thundereth on high; but now
doth he not honour me, no, not one whit. Verily Atreus’ son,
wide-ruling Agamemnon, hath done me dishonour; for he hath taken away
my meed of honour and keepeth her of his own violent deed.”

So spake he weeping, and his lady mother heard him as she sate in the
sea-depths beside her aged sire. With speed arose she from the grey
sea, like a mist, and sate her before the face of her weeping son, and
stroked him with her hand, and spake and called on his name: “My child,
why weepest thou? What sorrow hath entered into they heart? Speak it
forth, hide it not in thy mind, that both may know it.”

Then with heavy moan Achilles fleet of foot spake to her: “Thou knowest
it; why should I tell this to thee that knowest all! We had fared to
Thebe, the holy city of Eetion, and laid it waste and carried hither
all the spoils. So the sons of the Achaians divided among them all
aright; and for Atreides they set apart Chryseis of the fair cheeks.
But Chryses, priest of Apollo the Far-darter, came unto the fleet ships
of the mail-clad Achaians to win his daughter’s freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling, and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff, and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host. Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest
and accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away and laid stern
charge upon him. So the old man went back in anger; and Apollo heard
his prayers, seeing he loved him greatly, and he aimed against the
Argives his deadly darts. So the people began to perish in multitudes,
and the god’s shafts ranged everywhither throughout the wide host of
the Achaians. Then of full knowledge the seer declared to us the oracle
of the Far-darter. Forthwith I first bade propitiate the god; but wrath
gat hold upon Atreus’ son thereat, and anon he stood up and spake a
threatening word, that hath now been accomplished. Her the
glancing-eyed Achaians are bringing on their fleet ship to Chryse, and
bear with them offerings to the king; and the other but now the heralds
went and took from my hut, even the daughter of Briseus, whom the sons
of the Achaians gave me. Thou therefore, if indeed thou canst, guard
thine own son; betake thee to Olympus and beseech Zeus by any word
whereby thou ever didst make glad his heart. For oft have I heard thee
proclaiming in my father’s halls and telling that thou alone amid the
immortals didst save the son of Kronos, lord of the storm-cloud, from
shameful wreck, when all the other Olympians would have bound him, even
Hera and Poseidon and Pallas Athene. Then didst thou, O goddess, enter
in and loose him from his bonds, having with speed summoned to high
Olympus him of the hundred arms whom gods call Briareus, but all men
call Aigaion; for he is mightier even than his father—so he sate him by
Kroniol’s side rejoicing in his triumph, and the blessed gods feared
him withal and bound not Zeus. This bring thou to his remembrance and
sit by him and clasp his knees, if perchance he will give succour to
the Trojans; and for the Achaians, hem them among their ships’ sterns
about the bay, given over to slaughter; that they may make trial of
their king, and that even Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, may perceive
his blindness, in that he honoured not at all the best of the
Achaians.”

Then Thetis weeping made answer to him: “Ah me, my child, why reared I
thee, cursed in my motherhood? Would thou hadst been left tearless and
griefless amid the ships, seeing thy lot is very brief and endureth no
long while; but now art thou made short-lived alike and lamentable
beyond all men; in an evil hour I bare thee in our halls. But I will go
myself to snow-clad Olympus to tell this thy saying to Zeus, whose joy
is in the thunder, [perhaps rather, “hurler of the thunderbolt.”] if
perchance he may hearken to me. But tarry thou now amid thy
fleet-faring ships, and continue wroth with the Achaians, and refrain
utterly from battle: for Zeus went yesterday to Okeanos, unto the noble
Ethiopians for a feast, and all the gods followed with him; but on the
twelfth day will he return to Olympus, and then will I fare to Zeus’
palace of the bronze threshold, and will kneel to him and think to win
him.”

So saying she went her way and left him there, vexed in spirit for the
fair-girdled womal’s sake, whom they had taken perforce despite his
will: and meanwhile Odysseus came to Chryse with the holy hecatomb.
When they were now entered within the deep haven, they furled their
sails and laid them in the black ship, and lowered the mast by the
forestays and brought it to the crutch with speed, and rowed her with
oars to the anchorage. Then they cast out the mooring stones and made
fast the hawsers, and so themselves went forth on to the sea-beach, and
forth they brought the hecatomb for the Far-darter Apollo, and forth
came Chryseis withal from the seafaring ship. Then Odysseus of many
counsels brought her to the altar and gave her into her father’s arms,
and spake unto him: “Chryses, Agamemnon king of men sent me hither to
bring thee thy daughter, and to offer to Phoebus a holy hecatomb on the
Danaans’ behalf, wherewith to propitiate the king that hath now brought
sorrow and lamentation on the Argives.”

So saying he gave her to his arms, and he gladly took his dear child;
and anon they set in order for the god the holy hecatomb about his
well-builded altar; next washed they their hands and took up the barley
meal. Then Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud for them:
“Hearken to me, god of the silver bow that standest over Chryse and
holy Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might; even as erst thou heardest
my prayer, and didst me honour, and mightily afflictest the people of
the Achaians, even so now fulfil me this my desire: remove thou from
the Danaans forthwith the loathly pestilence.”

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Now when they had
prayed and sprinkled the barley meal, first they drew back the victims’
heads and slaughtered them and flayed them, and cut slices from the
thighs and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid raw
collops thereon, and the old man burnt them on cleft wood and made
libation over them of gleaming wine; and at his side the young men in
their hands held five-pronged forks. Now when the thighs were burnt and
they had tasted the vitals, then sliced they all the rest and pierced
it through with spits, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off
again. So when they had rest from the task and had made ready the
banquet, they feasted, nor was their heart aught stinted of the fair
banquet. But when they had put away from them the desire of meat and
drink, the young men crowned the bowls with wine, and gave each man his
portion after the drink-offering had been poured into the cups. So all
day long worshipped they the god with music, singing the beautiful
paean, the sons of the Achaians making music to the Far-darter [or,
“the Averter” (of pestilence)]; and his heart was glad to hear. And
when the sun went down and darkness came on them, they laid them to
sleep beside the ship’s hawsers; and when rosy-fingered Dawn appeared,
the child of morning, then set they sail for the wide camp of the
Achaians; and Apollo the Far-darter sent them a favouring gale. They
set up their mast and spread the white sails forth, and the wind filled
the sail’s belly and the dark wave sang loud about the stem as the ship
made way, and she sped across the wave, accomplishing her journey. So
when they were now come to the wide camp of the Achaians, they drew up
their black ship to land high upon the sands, and set in line the long
props beneath her; and themselves were scattered amid their huts and
ships.

But he sat by his swift-faring ships, still wroth, even the
heaven-sprung son of Peleus, Achilles fleet of foot; he betook him
neither to the assembly that is the hero’s glory, neither to war, but
consumed his heart in tarrying in his place, and yearned for the
war-cry and for battle.

Now when the twelfth morn thereafter was come, then the gods that are
for ever fared to Olympus all in company, led of Zeus. And Thetis
forgat not her sol’s charge, but rose up from the sea-wave, and at
early morn mounted up to great heaven and Olympus. There found she
Kronos’ son of the far-sounding voice sitting apart from all on the
topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus. So she sat before his face and
with her left hand clasped his knees, and with her right touched him
beneath his chin, and spake in prayer to king Zeus son of Kronos:
“Father Zeus, if ever I gave thee aid amid the immortal gods, whether
by word or deed, fulfil thou this my desire: do honour to my son, that
is doomed to earliest death of all men: now hath Agamemnon king of men
done him dishonour, for he hath taken away his meed of honour and
keepeth her of his own violent deed. But honour thou him, Zeus of
Olympus, lord of counsel; grant thou victory to the Trojans the while
until the Achaians do my son honour and exalt him with recompense.”

So spake she; but Zeus the cloud-gatherer said no word to her, and sat
long time in silence. But even as Thetis had clasped his knees, so held
she by him clinging, and questioned him yet a second time: “Promise me
now this thing verily, and bow thy head thereto; or else deny me,
seeing there is naught for thee to fear; that I may know full well how
I among all gods am least in honour.”

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer, sore troubled, spake to her: “Verily it
is a sorry matter, if thou wilt set me at variance with Hera, whene’er
she provoketh me with taunting words. Even now she upbraideth me ever
amid the immortal gods, and saith that I aid the Trojans in battle. But
do thou now depart again, lest Hera mark aught; and I will take thought
for these things to fulfil them. Come now, I will bow my head to thee,
that thou mayest be of good courage; for that, of my part, is the
surest token amid the immortals; no word of mine is revocable nor false
nor unfulfilled when the bowing of my head hath pledged it.”

Kronion spake, and bowed his dark brow, and the ambrosial locks waved
from the king’s immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake.

Thus the twain took counsel and parted; she leapt therewith into the
deep sea from glittering Olympus, and Zeus fared to his own palace. All
the gods in company arose from their seats before their father’s face;
neither ventured any to await his coming, but stood up all before him.
So he sate him there upon his throne; but Hera saw, and was not
ignorant how that the daughter of the Ancient of the sea, Thetis the
silver-footed, had devised counsel with him. Anon with taunting words
spake she to Zeus the son of Kronos: “Now who among the gods, thou
crafty of mind, hath devised counsel with thee? It is ever thy good
pleasure to hold aloof from me and in secret meditation to give thy
judgments, nor of thine own good will hast thou ever brought thyself to
declare unto me the thing thou purposest.”

Then the father of gods and men made answer her: “Hera, think not thou
to know all my sayings; hard they are for thee, even though thou art my
wife. But whichsoever it is seemly for thee to hear, none sooner than
thou shall know, be he god or man. Only when I will to take thought
aloof from the gods, then do not thou ask of every matter nor make
question.”

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen made answer to him. “Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? Yea, surely of old I have
not asked thee nor made question, but in my heart sore afraid lest thou
have been won over by silver-footed Thetis, daughter of the Ancient of
the sea, for she at early morn sat by thee and clasped thy knees. To
her I deem thou gavest a sure pledge that thou wilt do honour to
Achilles, and lay many low beside the Achaians’ ships.”

To her made answer Zeus the cloud-gatherer: “Lady, Good lack! ever art
thou imagining, nor can I escape thee; yet shalt thou in no wise have
power to fulfil, but wilt be the further from my heart; that shall be
even the worse for thee. And if it be so, then such must my good
pleasure be. Abide thou in silence and hearken to my bidding, lest all
the gods that are in Olympus keep not off from thee my visitation, when
I put forth my hands unapproachable against thee.”

He said, and Hera the ox-eyed queen was afraid, and sat in silence,
curbing her heart; but throughout Zeus’ palace the gods of heaven were
troubled. Then Hephaistos the famed craftsman began to make harangue
among them, to do kindness to his mother, white-armed Hera: “Verily
this will be a sorry matter, neither any more endurable, if ye twain
thus fight for mortals’ sakes, and bring wrangling among the gods;
neither will there any more be joy of the goodly feast, seeing that
evil triumpheth. So I give counsel to my mother, though herself is
wise, to do kindness to our dear father Zeus, that our father upbraid
us not again and cast the banquet in confusion. What if the Olympian,
the lord of the lightning, will to dash us from our seats! for he is
strongest far. Nay, approach thou him with gentle words, then will the
Olympian forthwith be gracious unto us.”

So speaking he rose up and sat in his dear mother’s hand the
twy-handled cup, and spake to her: “Be of good courage, mother mine,
and endure, though thou art vexed, lest I behold thee, thou art so
dear, chastised before mine eyes, and then shall I not be able for all
my sorrow to save thee; for the Olympian is a hard foe to face. Yea,
once ere this, when I was fain to save thee, he caught me by my foot
and hurled me from the heavenly threshold; all day I flew, and at the
set of sun I fell in Lemnos, and little life was in me. There did the
Sintian folk forthwith tend me for my fall.”

He spake, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled, and smiling took the
cup at her sol’s hand. Then he poured wine to all the other gods from
right to left, ladling the sweet nectar from the bowl. And laughter
unquenchable arose amid the blessed gods to see Hephaistos bustling
through the palace.

So feasted they all day till the setting of the sun; nor was their soul
aught stinted of the fair banquet, nor of the beauteous lyre that
Apollo held, and the Muses singing alternately with sweet voice.

Now when the bright light of the sun was set, these went each to his
own house to sleep, where each one had his palace made with cunning
device by famed Hephaistos the lame god; and Zeus the Olympian, the
lord of lightning, departed to his couch where he was wont of old to
take his rest, whenever sweet sleep visited him. There went he up and
slept, and beside him was Hera of the golden throne.



BOOK II.

How Zeus beguiled Agamemnon by a dream; and of the assembly of the
Achaians and their marching forth to battle. And of the names and
numbers of the hosts of the Achaians and the Trojans.


Now all other gods and chariot-driving men slept all night long, only
Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep; rather was he pondering in his
heart how he should do honour to Achilles and destroy many beside the
Achaians’ ships. And this design seemed to his mind the best, to wit,
to send a baneful dream upon Agamemnon son of Atreus. So he spake, and
uttered to him winged words: “Come now, thou baneful Dream, go to the
Achaians’ fleet ships, enter into the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and tell him every word plainly as I charge thee. Bid him call to arms
the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now he may take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang.”

So spake he, and the Dream went his way when he had heard the charge.
With speed he came to the Achaians’ fleet ships, and went to Agamemnon
son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and ambrosial slumber
poured over him. So he stood over his head in seeming like unto the son
of Neleus, even Nestor, whom most of all the elders Agamemnon honoured;
in his likeness spake to him the heavenly Dream:

“Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses? To sleep all night
through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to whom peoples are
entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken straightway to me,
for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he be afar yet hath
great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to arms the
flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou mayest take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy heart, not let
forgetfulness come upon thee when honeyed sleep shall leave thee.”

So spake the Dream, and departed and left him there, deeming in his
mind things that were not to be fulfilled. For indeed he thought to
take Priam’s city that very day; fond man, in that he knew not the
plans that Zeus had in mind, who was willed to bring yet more grief and
wailing on Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn
fights. Then woke he from sleep, and the heavenly voice was in his
ears. So he rose up sitting, and donned his soft tunic, fair and
bright, and cast around him his great cloak, and beneath his glistering
feet he bound his fair sandals, and over his shoulders cast his
silver-studded sword, and grasped his sires’ sceptre, imperishable for
ever, wherewith he took his way amid the mail-clad Achaians’ ships.

Now went the goddess Dawn to high Olympus, foretelling daylight to Zeus
and all the immortals; and the king bade the clear-voiced heralds
summon to the assembly the flowing-haired Achaians. So did those
summon, and these gathered with speed.

But first the council of the great-hearted elders met beside the ship
of king Nestor the Pylos-born. And he that had assembled them framed
his cunning counsel: “Hearken, my friends. A dream from heaven came to
me in my sleep through the ambrosial night, and chiefly to goodly
Nestor was very like in shape and bulk and stature. And it stood over
my head and charged me saying: ‘Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer
of horses? To sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a
counsellor, to whom peoples are entrusted and so many cares belong. But
now hearken straightway to me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus,
who though he be afar yet hath great care for thee and pity. He biddeth
thee call to arms the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that
now thou mayest take the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the
immortals that dwell in the palaces of Olympus are no longer divided in
counsel, since Hera hath turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and
over the Trojans sorrows hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep
this in thy heart.’ So spake the dream and was flown away, and sweet
sleep left me. So come, let us now call to arms as we may the sons of
the Achaians. But first I will speak to make trial of them as is
fitting, and bid them flee with their benched ships; only do ye from
this side and from that speak to hold them back.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them Nestor,
who was king of sandy Pylos. He of good intent made harangue to them
and said: “My friends, captains and rulers of the Argives, had any
other of the Achaians told us this dream we might deem it a false
thing, and rather turn away therefrom; but now he hath seen it who of
all Achaians avoweth himself far greatest. So come, let us call to arms
as we may the sons of the Achaians.”

So spake he, and led the way forth from the council, and all the other
sceptred chiefs rose with him and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and
the people hastened to them. Even as when the tribes of thronging bees
issue from the hollow rock, ever in fresh procession, and fly
clustering among the flowers of spring, and some on this hand and some
on that fly thick; even so from ships and huts before the low beach
marched forth their many tribes by companies to the place of assembly.
And in their midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them
to go; and so they gathered. And the place of assemblage was in an
uproar, and the earth echoed again as the hosts sate them down, and
there was turmoil. Nine heralds restrained them with shouting, if
perchance they might refrain from clamour, and hearken to their kings,
the fosterlings of Zeus. And hardly at the last would the people sit,
and keep them to their benches and cease from noise. Then stood up lord
Agamemnon bearing his sceptre, that Hephaistos had wrought curiously.
Hephaistos gave it to king Zeus son of Kronos, and then Zeus gave it to
the messenger-god the slayer of Argus [Or, possibly, “the
swift-appearing”]; and king Hermes gave it to Pelops the charioteer,
and Pelops again gave it to Atreus shepherd of the host. And Atreus
dying left it to Thyestes rich in flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left
it to Agamemnon to bear, that over many islands and all Argos he should
be lord. Thereon he leaned and spake his saying to the Argives:

“My friends, Danaan warriors, men of Ares’ company, Zeus Kronos’ son
hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of soul; hard of heart
is he, for that erewhile he promised me and pledged his nod that not
till I had wasted well-walled Ilios should I return; but now see I that
he planned a cruel wile and biddeth me return to Argos dishonoured,
with the loss of many of my folk. So meseems it pleaseth most mighty
Zeus, who hath laid low the head of many a city, yea, and shall lay
low; for his is highest power. Shame is this even for them that come
after to hear; how so goodly and great a folk of the Achaians thus
vainly warred a bootless war, and fought scantier enemies, and no end
thereof is yet seen. For if perchance we were minded, both Achaians and
Trojans, to swear a solemn truce, and to number ourselves, and if the
Trojans should gather together all that have their dwellings in the
city, and we Achaians should marshal ourselves by tens, and every
company choose a Trojan to pour their wine, then would many tens lack a
cup-bearer: so much, I say, do the sons of the Achaians outnumber the
Trojans that dwell within the city. But allies from many cities, even
warriors that wield the spear, are therein, and they hinder me
perforce, and for all my will suffer me not to waste the populous
citadel of Ilios. Already have nine years of great Zeus passed away,
and our ships’ timbers have rotted and the tackling is loosed; while
there our wives and little children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet
is our task utterly unaccomplished wherefor we came hither. So come,
even as I bid let us all obey. Let us flee with our ships to our dear
native land; for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy.”

So spake he, and stirred the spirit in the breasts of all throughout
the multitude, as many as had not heard the council. And the assembly
swayed like high sea-waves of the Icarian Main that east wind and south
wind raise, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus; and even
as when the west wind cometh to stir a deep cornfield with violent
blast, and the ears bow down, so was all the assembly stirred, and they
with shouting hasted toward the ships; and the dust from beneath their
feet rose and stood on high. And they bade each man his neighbor to
seize the ships and drag them into the bright salt sea, and cleared out
the launching-ways, and the noise went up to heaven of their hurrying
homewards; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.

Then would the Argives have accomplished their return against the will
of fate, but that Hera spake a word to Athene: “Out on it, daughter of
aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Shall the Argives thus indeed
flee homeward to their dear native land over the sea’s broad back? But
they would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of
Argos, for whose sake many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far away
from his dear native land. But go thou now amid the host of the
mail-clad Achaians; with thy gentle words refrain thou every man,
neither suffer them to draw their curved ships down to the salt sea.”

So spake she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not; but
went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came with speed to the
fleet ships of the Achaians. There found she Odysseus standing, peer of
Zeus in counsel, neither laid he any hand upon his decked black ship,
because grief had entered into his heart and soul. And bright-eyed
Athene stood by him and said: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus
of many devices, will ye indeed fling yourselves upon your benched
ships to flee homeward to your dear native land? But ye would leave to
Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos, for whose sake
many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land.
But go thou now amid the host of the Achaians, and tarry not; and with
gentle words refrain every man, neither suffer them to draw their
curved ships down to the salt sea.”

So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking to him, and
set him to run, and cast away his mantle, the which his herald gathered
up, even Eurybated of Ithaca, that waited on him. And himself he went
to meet Agamemnon son of Atreus, and at his hand received the sceptre
of his sires, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his way amid the
ships of the mail-clad Achaians.

Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, he stood by
his side, and refrained him with gentle words: “Good sir, it is not
seemly to affright thee like a coward, but do thou sit thyself and make
all thy folk sit down. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the
purpose of Atreus’ son; now is he but making trial, and soon he will
afflict the sons of the Achaians. And heard we not all of us what he
spake in the council? Beware lest in his anger he evilly entreat the
sons of the Achaians. For proud is the soul of heaven-fostered kings;
because their honour is of Zeus, and the god of counsel loveth them.”

But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he
drave with his sceptre and chode him with loud words: “Good sir, sit
still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters; but thou
art no warrior, and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in
council. In no wise can we Achaians all be kings here. A multitude of
masters is no good thing; let there be one master, one king, to whom
the son of crooked-counselling Kronos hath granted it, [even the
sceptre and judgments, that he may rule among you”].

So masterfully ranged he the host; and they hasted back to the assembly
from ships and huts, with noise as when a wave of loud-sounding sea
roareth on the long beach and the main resoundeth.

Now all the rest sat down and kept their place upon the benches, only
Thersites still chattered on, the uncontrolled speech, whose mind was
full of words many and disorderly, wherewith to strive against the
chiefs idly and in no good order, but even as he deemed that he should
make the Argives laugh. And he was ill-favored beyond all men that came
to Ilios. Bandy-legged was he, and lame of one foot, and his two
shoulders rounded, arched down upon his chest; and over them his head
was warped, and a scanty stubble sprouted on it. Hateful was he to
Achilles above all and to Odysseus, for them he was wont to revile. But
now with shrill shout he poured forth his upbraidings upon goodly
Agamemnon. With him the Achaians were sore vexed and had indignation in
their souls. But he with loud shout spake and reviled Agamemnon:
“Atreides, for what art thou now ill content and lacking? Surely thy
huts are full of bronze and many women are in they huts, the chosen
spoils that we Achaians give thee first of all, whene’er we take a
town. Can it be that thou yet wantest gold as well, such as some one of
the horse-taming Trojans may bring from Ilios to ransom his son, whom I
perchance or some other Achaian have led captive; or else some young
girl, to know in love, whom thou mayest keep apart to thyself? But it
is not seemly for one that is their captain to bring the sons of the
Achaians to ill. Soft fools, base things of shame, ye women of Achaia
and men no more, let us depart home with our ships, and leave this
fellow here in Troy-land to gorge him with meeds of honour, that he may
see whether our aid avail him aught or no; even he that hath now done
dishonour to Achilles, a far better man than he; for he hath taken away
his meed of honour and keepeth it by his own violent deed. Of a very
surety is there no wrath at all in Achilles’ mind, but he is slack;
else this despite, thou son of Atreus, were thy last.”

So spake Thersites, reviling Agamemnon shepherd of the host. But goodly
Odysseus came straight to his side, and looking sternly at him with
hard words rebuked him: “Thersites, reckless in words, shrill orator
though thou art, refrain thyself, nor aim to strive singly against
kings. For I deem that no mortal is baser than thou of all that with
the sons of Atreus came before Ilios. Therefore were it well that thou
shouldest not have kings in thy mouth as thou talkest, and utter
revilings against them and be on the watch for departure. We know not
yet clearly how these things shall be, whether we sons of the Achaians
shall return for good or ill. Therefore now dost thou revile
continually Agamemnon son of Atreus, shepherd of the host, because the
Danaan warriors give him many gifts, and so thou talkest tauntingly.
But I will tell thee plain, and that I say shall even be brought to
pass: if I find thee again raving as now thou art, then may Odysseus’
head no longer abide upon his shoulders, nor may I any more be called
father of Telemachos, if I take thee not and strip from thee thy
garments, thy mantle and tunic that cover thy nakedness, and for
thyself send thee weeping to the fleet ships, and beat thee out of the
assembly with shameful blows.”

So spake he, and with his staff smote his back and shoulders: and he
bowed down and a big tear fell from him, and a bloody weal stood up
from his back beneath the golden sceptre. Then he sat down and was
amazed, and in pain with helpless look wiped away the tear. But the
rest, though they were sotty, laughed lightly at him, and thus would
one speak looking at another standing by: “Go to, of a truth Odysseus
hath wrought good deeds without number ere now, standing foremost in
wise counsels and setting battle in array, but now is this thing the
best by far that he hath wrought among the Argives, to wit, that he
hath stayed this prating railer from his harangues. Never again,
forsooth, will his proud soul henceforth bid him revile the kings with
slanderous words.”

So said the common sort; but up rose Odysseus waster of cities, with
sceptre in his hand. And by his side bright-eyed Athene in the likeness
of a herald bade the multitude keep silence, that the sons of the
Achaians, both the nearest and the farthest, might hear his words
together and give heed to his counsel. He of good intent made harangue
to them and said: “Atreides, now surely are the Achaians for making
thee, O king, most despised among all mortal men, nor will they fulfil
the promise that they pledged thee when they still were marching hither
from horse-pasturing Argos; that thou shouldest not return till thou
hadst laid well-walled Ilios waste. For like young children or widow
women do they wail each to the other of returning home. Yea, here is
toil to make a man depart disheartened. For he that stayeth away but
one single month far from his wife in his benched ship fretteth himself
when winter storms and the furious sea imprison him; but for us, the
ninth year of our stay here is upon us in its course. Therefore do I
not marvel that the Achaians should fret beside their beaked ships; yet
nevertheless is it shameful to wait long and to depart empty. Be of
good heart, my friends, and wait a while, until we learn whether
Kalchas be a true prophet or no. For this thing verily we know well in
our hearts, and ye all are witnesses thereof, even as many as the fates
of death have not borne away. It was as it were but yesterday or the
day before that the Achaians’ ships were gathering in Aulis, freighted
with trouble for Priam and the Trojans; and we round about a spring
were offering on the holy altars unblemished hecatombs to the
immortals, beneath a fair plane-tree whence flowed bright water, when
there was seen a great portent: a snake blood-red on the back,
terrible, whom the god of Olympus himself had sent forth to the light
of day, sprang from beneath the altar and darted to the plane-tree. Now
there were there the brood of a sparrow, tender little ones, upon the
topmost branch, nestling beneath the leaves; eight were they and the
mother of the little ones was the ninth, and the snake swallowed these
cheeping pitifully. And the mother fluttered around wailing for her
dear little ones; but he coiled himself and caught her by the wing as
she screamed about him. Now when he had swallowed the sparrow’s little
ones and the mother with them, the god who revealed him made of him a
sign; for the son of crooked-counselling Kronos turned him to stone,
and we stood by and marvelled to see what was done. So when the dread
portent brake in upon the hecatombs of the gods, then did Kalchas
forthwith prophesy, and said: ‘Why hold ye your peace, ye
flowing-haired Achaians? To us hath Zeus the counsellor shown this
great sign, late come, of late fulfilment, the fame whereof shall never
perish. Even as he swallowed the sparrow’s little ones and herself, the
eight wherewith the mother that bare the little ones was the ninth, so
shall we war there so many years, but in the tenth year shall we take
the wide-wayed city.’ So spake the seer; and now are all these things
being fulfilled. So come, abide ye all, ye well-greaved Achaians, even
where ye are, until we have taken the great city of Priam.”

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, and all round the ships
echoed terribly to the voice of the Achaians as they praised the saying
of god-like Odysseus. And then spake among them knightly Nestor of
Gerenia: “Out on it; in very truth ye hold assembly like silly boys
that have no care for deeds of war. What shall come of our covenants
and our oaths? Let all counsels be cast into the fire and all devices
of warriors and the pure drink-offerings and the right hands of
fellowship wherein we trusted. For we are vainly striving with words
nor can we find any device at all, for all our long tarrying here. Son
of Atreus, do thou still, as erst, keep steadfast purpose and lead the
Argives amid the violent fray; and for these, let them perish, the one
or two Achaians that take secret counsel—to depart to Argos first,
before they know whether the promise of aegis-bearing Zeus be a lie or
no. Yea, for I say that most mighty Kronion pledged us his word that
day when the Argives embarked upon their fleet ships, bearing unto the
Trojans death and fate; for by his lightning upon our right he
manifested signs of good. Therefore let Trojal’s wife and paid back his
strivings and groans for Helel’s sake. But if any man is overmuch
desirous to depart homewards, let him lay his hand upon his decked
black ship, that before all men he may encounter death and fate. But do
thou, my king, take good counsel thyself, and whate’er it be, shall not
be cast away. Separate thy warriors by tribes and by clans, Agamemnon,
that clan may give aid to clan and tribe to tribe. If thou do thus and
the Achaians hearken to thee, then wilt thou know who among thy
captains and who of the common sort is a coward, and who too is brave;
for they will fight each after their sort. So wilt thou know whether it
is even by divine command that thou shalt not take the city, or by the
baseness of thy warriors and their ill skill in battle.”

And lord Agamemnon answered and said to him: “Verily hast thou again
outdone the sons of the Achaians in speech, old man. Ah, father Zeus
and Athene and Apollo, would that among the Achaians I had ten such
councillors; then would the city of king Priam soon bow beneath our
hands, captive and wasted. But aegis-bearing Zeus, the son of Kronos,
hath brought sorrows upon me, in that he casteth my lot amid fruitless
wranglings and strifes. For in truth I and Achilles fought about a
damsel with violent words, and I was first to be angry; but if we can
only be at one in council, then will there no more be any putting off
the day of evil for the Trojans, no not for an instant. But now go ye
to your meal that we may join battle. Let each man sharpen well his
spear and bestow well his shield, and let him well give his
fleet-footed steeds their meal, and look well to his chariot on every
side and take thought for battle, that all day long we may contend in
hateful war. For of respite shall there intervene no, not a whit, only
that the coming of night shall part the fury of warriors. On each mal’s
breast shall the baldrick of his covering shield be wet with sweat, and
his hand shall grow faint about the spear, and each mal’s horse shall
sweat as he draweth the polished chariot. And whomsoever I perceive
minded to tarry far from the fight beside the beaked ships, for him
shall there be no hope hereafter to escape the dogs and birds of prey.”

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, like to a wave on a steep
shore, when the south wind cometh and stirreth it; even on a jutting
rock, that is never left at peace by the waves of all winds that rise
from this side and from that. And they did sacrifice each man to one of
the everlasting gods, praying for escape from death and the tumult of
battle. But Agamemnon king of men slew a fat bull of five years to most
mighty Kronion, and called the elders, the princes of the Achaian host,
Nestor first and king Idomeneus, and then the two Aiantes and Tydeus’
son, and sixthly Odysseus peer of Zeus in counsel. And Menelaos of the
loud war-cry came to him unbidden, for he knew in his heart how his
brother toiled. Then stood they around the bull and took the
barley-meal. And Agamemnon made his prayer in their midst and said:
“Zeus, most glorious, most great, god of the storm-cloud, that dwellest
in the heaven, vouchsafe that the sun set not upon us nor the darkness
come near, till I have laid low upon the earth Priam’s palace smirched
with smoke, and burnt the doorways thereof with consuming fire, and
rent on Hector’s breast his doublet cleft with the blade; and about him
may full many of his comrades prone in the dust bite the earth.”

So spake he, but not as yet would Kronion grant him fulfilment; he
accepted the sacrifice, but made toil to wax increasingly.

Now when they had prayed and sprinkled the barley-meal they first drew
back the bull’s head and cut his throat and flayed him, and cut slices
from the thigh’s and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and
laid raw collops thereon. And these they burnt on cleft wood stript of
leaves, and spitted the vitals and held them over Hephaistos’ flame.
Now when the thighs were burnt and they had tasted the vitals, then
sliced they all the rest and pierced it through with spits, and roasted
it carefully and drew all off again. So when they had rest from the
task and had made ready the banquet, they feasted, nor was their heart
aught stinted of the fair banquet. But when they had put away from them
the desire of meat and drink, then did knightly Nestor of Gerenia open
his saying to them: “Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of men,
let us not any more hold long converse here, nor for long delay the
work that god putteth in our hands; but come, let the heralds of the
mail-clad Achaians make proclamation to the folk and gather them
throughout the ships; and let us go thus in concert through the wide
host of the Achaians, that the speedier we may arouse keen war.”

So spake he and Agamemnon king of men disregarded not. Straightway he
bade the clear-voiced heralds summon to battle the flowing-haired
Achaians. So those summoned and these gathered with all speed. And the
kings, the fosterlings of Zeus that were about Atreus’ son, eagerly
marshalled them, and bright-eyed Athene in the midst, bearing the holy
aegis that knoweth neither age nor death, whereon wave an hundred
tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven and each one an hundred oxen
worth. Therewith she passed dazzling through the Achaian folk, urging
them forth; and in every mal’s heart she roused strength to battle
without ceasing and to fight. So was war made sweeter to them than to
depart in their hollow ships to their dear native land. Even as
ravaging fire kindleth a boundless forest on a mountail’s peaks, and
the blaze is seen from afar, even so as they marched went the dazzling
gleam from the innumerable bronze through the sky even unto the
heavens.

And as the many tribes of feathered birds, wild geese or cranes or
long-necked swans, on the Asian mead by Kaystrios’ stream, fly hither
and thither joying in their plumage, and with loud cries settle ever
onwards, and the mead resounds; even so poured forth the many tribes of
warriors from ships and huts into the Skamandrian plain. And the earth
echoed terribly beneath the tread of men and horses. So stood they in
the flowery Skamandrian plain, unnumbered as are leaves and flowers in
their season. Even as the many tribes of thick flies that hover about a
herdsmal’s steading in the spring season, when milk drencheth the
pails, even in like number stood the flowing-haired Achaians upon the
plain in face of the Trojans, eager to rend them asunder. And even as
the goatherds easily divide the ranging flocks of goats when they
mingle in the pasture, so did their captains marshal them on this side
and that, to enter into the fray, and in their midst lord Agamemnon,
his head and eyes like unto Zeus whose joy is in the thunder, and his
waist like unto Ares and his breast unto Poseidon. Even as a bull
standeth out far foremost amid the herd, for his is pre-eminent amid
the pasturing kine, even such did Zeus make Atreides on that day,
pre-eminent among many and chief amid heroes.

Tell me now, ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus—seeing that
ye are goddesses and are at hand and know all things, but we hear only
a rumour and know not anything—who were the captains of the Danaans and
their lords. But the common sort could I not number nor name, nay, not
if ten tongues were mine and ten mouths, and a voice unwearied, and my
heart of bronze within me, did not the Muses of Olympus, daughters of
aegis-bearing Zeus, put into my mind all that came to Ilios. So will I
tell the captains of the ships and all the ships in order.

Of the Boiotians Peneleos and Leitos were captains, and Arkesilaos and
Prothoenor and Klonios; these were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky
Aulis and Schoinos and Skolos and Eteonos full of ridges, Thespeia and
Graia and Mykalessos with wide lawns; and that dwelt about Harma and
Eilesion and Erythrai, and they that possessed Eleon and Peteon and
Hyle, Okalea and the stablished fortress of Medeon, Kopai and Eutresis
and Thisbe haunt of doves; and they of Koroneia and grassy Haliartos,
and that possessed Plataia and that dwelt in Glisas, and that possessed
the stablished fortress of lesser Thebes and holy Onchestos, Poseidol’s
bright grove; and that possessed Arne rich in vineyards, and Mideia and
sacred Nisa and Anthedon on the furthest borders. Of these there came
fifty ships, and in each one embarked young men of the Boiotians an
hundred and twenty. And they that dwelt in Aspledon and Orchomenos of
the Minyai were led of Askalaphos and Ialmenos, sons of Ares, whom
Astyoche conceived of the mighty god in the palace of Aktor son of
Azeus, having entered her upper chamber, a stately maiden; for mighty
Ares lay with her privily. And with them sailed thirty hollow ships.

And the Phokians were led of Schedios and Epistrophos, sons of
great-hearted Iphitos son of Naubolos; these were they that possessed
Kyparissos and rocky Pytho and sacred Krisa and Daulis and Panopeus,
and they that dwelt about Anemoreia and Hyampolis, yea, and they that
lived by the goodly river Kephisos and possessed Lilaia by Kephisos’
springs. And with them followed thirty black ships. So they marshalled
the ranks of the Phokians diligently, and had their station hard by the
Boiotians on the left.

And of the Lokrians the fleet son of Oileus was captain, Aias the less,
that was not so great as was the Telamonian Aias but far less. Small
was he, with linen corslet, but with the spear he far outdid all the
Hellenes and Achaians. These were they that dwelt in Kynos and Opus and
Kalliaros and Bessa and Skarphe and lovely Augeiai and Tarphe and
Thronion, about the streams of Boagrios. And with Aias followed forty
black ships of the Lokrians that dwell over against holy Euboia.

And the Abantes breathing fury, they that possessed Euboia and Chalkis
and Eiretria and Histiaia rich in vines, and Kerinthos by the sea and
the steep fortress of Dios and they that possessed Karytos, and they
that dwelt in Styra, all these again were led of Elephenor of the stock
of Ares, even the son of Chalkodon, and captain of the proud Abantes.
And with him followed the fleet Abantes with hair flowing behind,
spearmen eager with ashen shafts outstretched to tear the corslets on
the breasts of the foes. And with him forty black ships followed.

And they that possessed the goodly citadel of Athens, the domain of
Erechtheus the high-hearted, whom erst Athene daughter of Zeus fostered
when Earth, the grain-giver, brought him to birth;—and she gave him a
resting-place in Athens in her own rich sanctuary; and there the sons
of the Athenians worship him with bulls and rams as the years turn in
their courses—these again were led of Menestheus son of Peteos. And
there was no man upon the face of earth that was like him for the
marshalling of horsemen and warriors that bear the shield. Only Nestor
rivalled him, for he was the elder by birth. And with him rivalled him,
for he was the elder by birth. And with him fifty black ships followed.

And Aias led twelve ships from Salamis, [and brought them and set them
where the battalions of the Athenians stood.]

And they that possessed Argos and Tiryns of the great walls, Hermione
and Asine that enfold the deep gulf, Troizen and Eionai and Epidauros
full of vines, and the youths of the Achaians that possessed Aigina and
Mases, these were led of Diomedes of the loud war-cary and Sthenelos,
dear son of famous Kapaneus. And the third with them came Euryalos, a
godlike warrior, the son of king Mekisteus son of Talaos. But Diomedes
of the loud war-cry was lord over all. And with them eighty black ships
followed.

And of them that possessed the stablished fortress of Mykene and
wealthy Corinth and stablished Kleonai, and dwelt in Orneiai and lovely
Araithyrea and Sikyon, wherein Adrestos was king at the first; and of
them that possessed Hyperesie and steep Gonoessa and Pellene, and dwelt
about Aigion and through all the coast-land and about broad Helike, of
them did lord Agamemnon son of Atreus lead an hundred ships. With him
followed most and goodliest folk by far; and in their midst himself was
clad in flashing bronze, all glorious, and was pre-eminent amid all
warriors, because he was goodliest and led folk far greatest in number.

And of them that possessed Lakedaimon lying low amid the rifted hills,
and Pharis and Sparta and Messe, the haunt of doves, and dwelt in
Bryseiai and lovely Augeiai, and of them too that possessed Amyklai and
the sea-coast fortress of Helos, and that possessed Laas and dwelt
about Oitylos, of these was the king’s brother leader, even Menelaos of
the loud war-cry, leader of sixty ships, and these were arrayed apart.
And himself marched among them confident in his zeal, urging his men to
battle: and his heart most of all was set to take vengeance for his
strivings and groans for Helel’s sake [Or, “for Helel’s searchings of
heart and groans.”].

And of them that dwelt in Pylos and lovely Arene and Thryon the
fording-place of Alpheios, and in established Aipy, and were
inhabitants of Kyparisseis and Amphigeneia and Pteleos and Helos and
Dorion—where the Muses met Thamyris the Thracian, and made an end of
his singing, as he was faring from Oichalia, from Eurytos the
Oichalian; for he averred with boasting that he would conquer, even did
the Muses themselves sing against him, the daughters of aegis-bearing
Zeus; but they in their anger maimed him, moreover they took from him
the high gift of song and made him to forget his harping—of all these
was knightly Nestor of Gerenia leader, and with him sailed ninety
hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Arkadia beneath the steep mountain of
Kyllene, beside the tomb of Aipytos, where are warriors that fight hand
to hand; and of them that dwelt in Pheneos and Orchomenos abounding in
flocks, and Rhipe and Stratie and windy Enispe, and that possessed
Tegea and lovely Mantineia, and possessed Stymphelos and dwelt in
Parhasie, of these was Ankaios’ son lord Agapenor leader, even of sixty
ships; and in each ship embarked many Arkadian warriors skilled in
fight. For Agamemnon king of men himself gave them benched ships
wherewith to cross the wine-dark sea, even he the son of Atreus; for
matters of seafaring concerned them not.

And they too that inhabited Bouprasion and goodly Elis, so much thereof
as Hyrmine and Myrsinos upon the borders and the Olenian rock and
Aleision bound between them, of these men there were four captains, and
ten swift ships followed each one, and many Epeians embarked thereon.
So some were led of Amphimachos and Thalpios, of the lineage of Aktor,
sons one of Kteatos and one of Eurytos; and of some was stalwart Diores
captain, son of Amarynkes; and of the fourth company godlike Polyxeinos
was captain, son of king Agasthenes Augeias’ son.

And them of Doulichion and the holy Echinean Isles that stand beyond
the sea over against Elis, even these did Meges lead, the peer of Ares,
Phyleides to wit, for he was begotten of knightly Phyleus dear to Zeus,
him that erst changed his habitation to Doulichion for anger against
his father. And with him followed forty black ships.

And Odysseus led the great-hearted Kephallenians, them that possessed
Ithaka and Neriton with quivering leafage, and dwelt in Krokyleia and
rugged Aigilips, and them that possessed Zakynthos and that dwelt in
Samos, and possessed the mainland and dwelt in the parts over against
the isles. Them did Odysseus lead, the peer of Zeus in counsel, and
with him followed twelve ships with vermillion prow.

And of the Aitolians Thoas was captain, the son of Andraimon, even of
them that dwelt in Pleuron and Olenos and Pylene, and Chalkis on the
sea-shore and rocky Kalydon. For the sons of great-hearted Oineus were
no more, neither did he still live, and golden-haired Meleagros was
dead, to whose hands all had been committed, for him to be king of the
Aitolians. And with Thoas there followed forty black ships.

And of the Cretans Idomeneus the famous spearman was leader, even of
them that possessed Knosos and Gortys of the great walls, Lyktos and
Miletos and chalky Lykastos and Phaistos and Rhytion, stablished cities
all; and of all others that dwelt in Crete of the hundred cities. Of
these men was Idomeneus the famous spearman leader, and Meriones peer
of the man-slaying war-god. With these followed eighty black ships.

And Tlepolemmos, Herakles’ son goodly and tall, led from Rhodes nine
ships of the lordly Rhodians, that dwelt in Rhodes in threefold
ordering, in Lindos and Ialysos and chalky Kameiros. These were led of
Tlepolemos the famous spearman, that was born to great Herakles by
Astyocheia, whom he had brought away from Ephyre by the river Selleeis,
when he laid waste many cities of strong men, fosterlings of Zeus. Now
when Tlepolemos had grown to manhood within the strong palace walls,
anon he slew his own father’s dear uncle, an old man now, Likymnios of
the stock of Ares. Then with speed built he ships and gathered much
folk together, and went fleeing across the deep, because the other sons
and grandsons of great Herakles threatened him. So he came to Rhodes a
wanderer, enduring hardships, and his folk settled by kinship in three
tribes, and were loved of Zeus that is king among gods and men; and
Kronion poured upon them exceeding great wealth.

Nireus, moreover, led three trim ships from Syme, Nireus son of Aglaia
and king Charopos, Nireus the most beauteous man that came up under
Ilios of all the Danaans, after the noble son of Peleus. Howbeit he was
a weakling, and a scanty host followed him.

And of them that possessed Nisyros and Krapathos and Kasos and Kos the

city of Eurypylos, and the Kalydnian Isles, of them Pheidippos and

Antiphos were leaders, the two sons of king Thessalos son of Herakles.

With them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

Now all moreover that dwelt in the Pelasgian Argos and inhabited Alos
and Alope and Trachis and possessed Phthia and Hellas the home of fair
women, and were called Myrmidons and Hellenes and Achaians; of all
these, even fifty ships, Achilles was captain. But these took no
thought of noisy war; for there was no man to array them in line of
battle. For fleet-footed goodly Achilles lay idle amid the ships, wroth
for the sake of a damsel, Briseis of the lovely hair, whom he had won
from Lyrnessos and the walls of Thebe, and overthrew Mynes and
Epistrophos, warriors that bare the spear, sons of king Euenos Selepos’
son. For her sake lay Achilles sorrowing; but soon was he to arise
again.

And of them that possessed Phylake and flowery Pyrasos, Demeter’s
sanctuary, and Iton mother of flocks, and Antron by the sea-shore and
Pteleos couched in grass, of all these was warlike Protesilaos leader
while yet he lived; but now ere this the black earth held him fast. His
wife with marred visage was left alone in Phylake, yea, and his bridal
chamber half builded; for a Dardanian warrior slew him as he leapt from
his ship far first of the Achaians. Yet neither were his men
leaderless, though they sorrowed for their leader; for Podarkes of the
stock of Ares marshalled them, son of Phylakos’ son Iphiklos was he,
the lord of many flocks, own brother of great-hearted Protesilaos, and
younger-born than he: but the other was alike the elder and the braver,
even Protesilaos, that mighty man of war. Yet did not the host lack at
all a leader, only they yearned for the noble dead. With him followed
forty black ships.

And of them that dwelt in Pherai by the Boibeian mere, in Boibe and

Glaphyre and stablished Iolkos, of them, even eleven ships, Admetos’

dear son was leader, Eumelos whom Alkestis, fair among women, bare to

Admetos, she that was most beauteous to look upon of the daughters of

Pelias.

And of them that dwelt in Methone and Thaumakie, and possessed Meliboia
and rugged Olizon, of these, even seven ships, was Philoktetes leader,
the cunning archer; and in each ship sailed fifty oarsmen skilled to
fight amain with the bow. But their captain lay enduring sore pain in
the isle of goodly Lemnos, where the sons of the Achaians left him sick
of a grievous wound from a deadly water-snake. There lay he pining; yet
were the Argives soon to bethink them beside their ships of king
Philoktetes. Yet neither were his men leaderless, only they sorrowed
for their leader; but Medon marshalled them, Oileus’ bastard son, whom
Rhene bare to Oileus waster of cities.

And of them that possessed Trikke and terraced ithome and that
possessed Oichalia city of Eurytos the Oichalian, of these again
Asklepios’ two sons were leaders, the cunning leeches Podaleirios and
Machaon. And with them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Ormenios and the fountain of Hypereia, and
possessed Asterion and the white crests of Titanos, of these was
Eurypylos leader, Euaimol’s glorious son; and with him, forty black
ships followed.

And of them that possessed Argissa and dwelt in Gyrtona, Orthe and
Elone and the white city of Olooson, of these was captain unflinching
Polypoites, son of Peirithoos that immortal Zeus begat: and Polypoites
did famed Hippodameia conceive of Peirithoos on that day when he took
vengeance of the shaggy wild folk, and thrust them forth from Pelion
and drave them to the Aithikes. And Polypoites ruled not alone, but
with him was Leonteus of the stock of Ares, son of high-hearted Koronos
Kaineus’ son. And with them forty black ships followed.

And Gouneus from Kyphos led two-and-twenty ships, and with him followed
the Enienes and unflinching Peraibians that had pitched their homes
about wintry Dodona, and dwelt on the tilth about lovely Titaresios
that poureth his fair-flowing stream into Peneios. Yet doth he not
mingle with the silver eddies of Peneios, but floweth on over him like
unto oil, seeing that he is an offspring from the water of Styx, the
dread river of the oath.

And the Magnetes were led of Prothoos son of Tenthredon, even they that
dwelt about Peneios and Pelion with trembling leafage. These did fleet
Prothoos lead, and with him forty black ships followed.

So these were the leaders of the Danaans and their captains. Now tell
me, O Muse, who among them was first and foremost, of warriors alike
and horses that followed the sons of Atreus. Of horses they of Pheres’
son were far goodliest, those that Eumelos drave, swift as birds, like
of coat, like of age, matched to the measure of a levelling line across
their backs. These were reared in Peraia by Apollo of the silver bow,
two mares carrying onward the terror of battle. But of warriors far
best was the Telamonian Aias, while the wrath of Achilles yet endured;
for he was greatest of all, he and his horses that bore him, even
Peleus’ noble son. But he lay idle among his seafaring ships, in sore
wrath against Agamemnon Atreus’ son, shepherd of the host; and his folk
along the sea-shore sported with quoits and with casting of javelins
and archery; and the horses each beside his own chariot stood idle,
champing clover and parsley of the marsh, and their lords’ chariots lay
well covered up within the huts, while the men yearned for their
warrior chief, and wandered hither and thither through the camp and
fought not.

So marched they then as though all the land were consuming with fire;
and the earth groaned beneath them as at the wrath of Zeus whose joy is
in the thunder, when he lasheth the earth about Typhoeus in the country
of the Arimoi, where men say is Typhoeus’ couch. Even so groaned the
earth aloud at their tread as they went: and with speed advanced they
across the plain.

Now fleet Iris the wind-footed went to the Trojans, a messenger from
aegis-bearing Zeus, with a grievous message. These were holding
assembly at Priam’s gate, being gathered all together both young men
and old. And fleet-footed Iris stood hard by and spake to them; and she
made her voice like to the voice of Polites son of Priam, who was the
sentinel of the Trojans and was wont to sit trusting in his fleetness
upon the barrow of Aisyetes of old, and on the top thereof wait the
sallying of the Achaians forth from their ships. Even in his likeness
did fleet-footed Iris speak to Priam: “Old man, words beyond number are
still pleasant to thee as erst in the days of peace; but war without
respite is upon us. Of a truth have I very oft ere now entered into
battles of the warriors, yet have I never seen so goodly a host and so
great; for in the very likeness of the leaves of the forest or the
sands of the sea are they marching along the plain to fight against the
city. But Hector, thee do I charge beyond all to do even as I shall
say. Seeing that the allies are very many throughout Priam’s great
city, and diverse men, being scattered abroad, have diverse tongues;
therefore let each one give the word to those whose chieftain he is,
and them let him lead forth and have the ordering of his countrymen.”

So spake she, and Hector failed not to know the voice of the goddess,
and straightway dismissed the assembly, and they rushed to arms. And
the gates were thrown open wide, and the host issued forth, footmen and
horsemen, and mighty din arose.

Now there is before the city a certain steep mound apart in the plain,
with a clear way about it on this side and on that; and men indeed call
this “Batieia,” but the immortals call it “The tomb of lithe Myrine.”
There did the Trojans and their allies divide their companies.

Amid the Trojans great Hector of the glancing helm was leader, the son
of Priam; with him the greatest hosts by far and the goodliest were
arrayed, eager warriors of the spear.

But the Dardanians were led of the princely son of Anchises, Aineias,
whom bright Aphrodite conceived to Anchises amids the spurs of Ida, a
goddess wedded to a mortal. Neither was he alone; with him were
Antenor’s two sons, Archelochos and Akamas, well skilled in all the
ways of war.

And of them that dwelt in Zeleia beneath the nethermost foot of Ida,
the men of substance that drink the dark waters of Aisepos, even the
Troes; of these Lykaol’s glorious son was leader, Pandaros, to whom
Apollo himself gave the bow.

And of them that possessed Adresteia and the land of Apaisos and
possessed Pityeia and the steep hill of Tereia, of these Adrestos was
captain, and Amphios of the linen corslet, the two sons of Merops of
Perkote, that beyond all men knew soothsaying, and would have hindered
his children marching to murderous war. But they gave him no heed, for
the fates of black death led them on.

And they that dwelt about Perkote and Praktios and possessed Sestos and
Abydos and bright Arisbe, these were led of Hyrtakos’ son Asios, a
prince of men, Asios son of Hyrtakos, whom his tall sorrel steeds
brought from Arisbe, from the river Selleeis.

And Hippothoos led the tribes of the Pelasgians that fight with spears,

them that inhabited deep-soiled Larisa. These were led of Hippothoos
and

Pylaios of the stock of Ares, twain sons of Pelasgian Lethos son of

Teutamos.

And the Thracians were led of Akamas and hero Peiroos, even all they
that the strong stream of Hellespont shutteth in. And Euphemos was
captain of the Kikonian spearmen, the son of Troizenos Keos’ son,
fosterling of Zeus.

But Pyraichmes led the Paionians with curving bows, from far away in
Amydon, from the broad stream of Axios, Axios whose water is the
fairest that floweth over the face of the earth.

And Pylaimenes of rugged heart led the Paphlagonians from the land of
the Eneti, whence is the breed of wild mules. This folk were they that
possessed Kytoros and dwelt about Sesamon, and inhabited their famed
dwellings round the river Parthenios and Kromna and Aigialos and lofty
Erythini.

And the Alizones were led of Odios and Epistrophos, from far away in

Alybe, where is the birthplace of silver.

And the Mysians were led of Chromis and Ennomos the augur, yet with all
his auguries warded he not black fate from him, but was vanguished by
the hand of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, when he made havoc of
the Trojans there and of the rest.

And Phorkys and godlike Askanios led the Phrygians from far Askania,
and these were eager to fight in the battle-throng.

And the Maionians were commanded of Mesthles and Antiphos, Talaimenes’
two sons, whose mother was the Gygaian mere. So these led the
Maionians, whose birthplace was under Tmolos.

But Nastes led the Karians, uncouth of speech, that possessed Miletos
and the mountain of Phthires, of leafage numberless, and the streams of
Maiandros and the steep crest of Mykale. These were led of Amphimachos
and Nastes: Nastes and Amphimachos the glorious children of Nomion. And
he came, forsooth, to battle with golden attire like a girl—fond man:
that held not back in any wise grievous destruction, but he was
vanguished by the hands of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, and
wise-hearted Achilles carried away his gold.

And Sarpedon and blameless Glaukos led the Lykians from far away in

Lykia by eddying Xanthos.



BOOK III.

How Menelaos and Paris fought in single combat; and Aphrodite rescued
Paris. And how Helen and Priam beheld the Achaian host from the walls
of Troy.


Now when they were arrayed, each company with their captains, the
Trojans marched with clamour and with shouting like unto birds, even as
when there goeth up before heaven a clamour of cranes which flee from
the coming of winter and sudden rain, and fly with clamour towards the
streams of ocean, bearing slaughter and fate to the Pigmy men, and in
early morn offer cruel battle. But on the other side marched the
Achaians in silence breathing courage, eager at heart to give succour
man to man.

Even as when the south wind sheddeth mist over the crests of a
mountain, mist unwelcome to the shepherd, but to the robber better than
night, and a man can see no further than he casteth a stone; even so
thick arose the gathering dust-clouds at their tread as they went; and
with all speed they advanced across the plain.

So when they were now come nigh in onset on each other, godlike
Alexandros played champion to the Trojans, wearing upon his shoulders
panther-skin and curved bow and sword; and he brandished two
bronze-headed spears and challenged all the chieftains of the Argives
to fight him man to man in deadly combat. But when Menelaos dear to
Ares marked him coming in the forefront of the multitude with long
strides, then even as a lion is glad when he lighteth upon a great
carcase, a horned stag, or a wild goat that he hath found, being an
hungered; and so he devoureth it amain, even though the fleet hounds
and lusty youths set upon him; even thus was Menelaos glad when his
eyes beheld godlike Alexandros; for he thought to take vengeance upon
the sinner. So straightway he leap in his armour from his chariot to
the ground.

But when godlike Alexandros marked him appear amid the champions, his
heart was smitten, and he shrank back into the host of his comrades,
avoiding death. And even as a man that hath seen a serpent in a
mountain glade starteth backward and trembling seizeth his feet beneath
him, and he retreateth back again, and paleness hath hold of his
cheeks, even so did godlike Alexandros for fear of Atreus’ son shrink
back into the throng of lordly Trojans. But Hector beheld and upbraided
him with scornful words: “Ill Paris, most fair in semblance, thou
deceiver woman-mad, would thou hadst been unborn and died unwed. Yea,
that were my desire, and it were far better than thus to be our shame
and looked at askance of all men. I ween that the flowing-haired
Achaians laugh, deeming that a prince is our champion only because a
goodly favour is his; but in his heart is there no strength nor any
courage. Art thou indeed such an one that in thy seafaring ships thou
didst sail over the deep with the company of thy trusty comrades, and
in converse with strangers didst bring back a fair woman from a far
country, one that was by marriage daughter to warriors that bear the
spear, that she might be a sore mischief to they father and city and
all the realm, but to our foes a rejoicing, and to thyself a hanging of
the head? And canst thou not indeed abide Menelaos dear to Ares? Thou
mightest see what sort of warrior is he whose lovely wife thou hast.
Thy lyre will not avail thee nor the gifts of Aphrodite, those thy
locks and fair favour, when thou grovellest in the dust. But the
Trojans are very cowards: else ere this hadst thou donned a robe of
stone [i.e., been stoned by the people] for all the ill thou hast
wrought.”

And godlike Alexandros made answer to him again: “Hector, since in
measure thou chidest me and not beyond measure—they heart is ever keen,
even as an axe that pierceth a beam at the hand of a man that shapeth a
ship’s timber with skill, and thereby is the mal’s blow strengthened;
even such is thy heart undaunted in thy breast. Cast not in my teeth
the lovely gifts of golden Aphrodite; not to be flung aside are the
gods’ glorious gifts that of their own good will they give; for by his
desire can no man win them. But now if thou wilt have me do battle and
fight, make the other Trojans sit down and all the Achaians, and set ye
me in the midst, and Menelaos dear to Ares, to fight for Helen and all
her wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let
him take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home. And
let the rest pledge friendship and sure oaths; so may ye dwell in
deep-soiled Troy, and let them depart to Argos pasture-land of horses,
and Achaia home of fair women.”

So spake he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his saying, and went
into the midst and restrained the battalions of the Trojans, with his
spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down. But the
flowing-haired Achaians kept shooting at him, aiming with arrows and
casting stones. But Agamemnon king of men cried aloud: “Refrain, ye
Argives; shoot not, ye sons of the Achaians; for Hector of the glancing
helm hath set himself to say somewhat.”

So spake he, and they refrained from battle and made silence speedily.
And Hector spake between the two hosts, “Hear of me, Trojans and
well-greaved Achaians, the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife
hath come about. He biddeth the other Trojans and all the Achaians to
lay down their goodly armour on the bounteous earth, and himself in the
midst and Menelaos dear to Ares to fight alone for Helen and all her
wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let him
take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home; but let
all of us pledge friendship and sure oaths.”

So spake he, and they all kept silence and were still. Then in their
midst spake Menelaos of the loud war-cry: “Hearken ye now to me, too;
for into my heart most of all is grief entered; and I deem that the
parting of Argives and Trojans hath come at last; seeing ye have
endured many ills because of my quarrel and the first sin of
Alexandros. And for whichsoever of us death and fate are prepared, let
him lie dead: and be ye all parted with speed. Bring ye two lambs, one
white ram and one black ewe, for earth and sun; and let us bring one
for Zeus. And call hither great Priam, that he may pledge the oath
himself, seeing he hath sons that are overweening and faithless, lest
any by transgression do violence to the oath of Zeus; for young mel’s
hearts are ever lifted up. But wheresoever an old man entereth in, he
looketh both before and after, whereby the best issue shall come for
either side.”

So spake he, and Achaians and Trojans were glad, deeming that they
should have rest from grievous war. So they refrained their chariots to
the ranks, and themselves alighted and doffed their arms. And these
they laid upon the earth each close to each, and there was but small
space between. And Hector sent two heralds to the city will all speed,
to bring the lambs, and to call Priam. And lord Agamemnon sent forth
Talthybios to go to the hollow ships, and bade him bring a ram; and he
was not disobedient to noble Agamemnon.

Now Iris went with a message to white-armed Helen in the likeness of
her husband’s sister, the spouse of Antenor’s son, even her that lord
Helikaon Antenor’s son had to wife, Laodike fairest favoured of Priam’s
daughters. And in the hall she found Helen weaving a great purple web
of double fold, and embroidering thereon many battles of horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians, that they had endured for her sake at
the hands of Ares. So fleet-footed Iris stood by her side and said:
“Come hither, dear sister, that thou mayest see the wondrous doings of
horse-taming Trojans and mail-clad Achaians. They that erst waged
tearful war upon each other in the plain, eager for deadly battle, even
they sit now in silence, and the tall spears are planted by their
sides. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to Ares will fight with their
tall spears for thee; and thou wilt be declared the dear wife of him
that conquereth.”

So spake the goddess, and put into her heart sweet longing for her
former husband and her city and parents.

Forthwith she veiled her face in shining linen, and hastened from her
chamber, letting fall a round tear; not unattended, for there followed
with her two handmaidens, Aithre daughter of Pittheus and ox-eyed
Klymene. Then came she straightway to the place of the Skaian gates.
And they that were with Priam and Panthoos and Thymoites and Lampos and
Klytios and Hiketaon of the stock of Ares, Oukalegon withal and
Antenor, twain sages, being elders of the people, sat at the Skaian
gates. These had now ceased from battle for old age, yet were they
right good orators, like grasshoppers that in a forest sit upon a tree
and utter their lily-like [supposed to mean “delicate” or “tender”]
voice; even so sat the elders of the Trojans upon the tower. Now when
they saw Helen coming to the tower they softly spake winged words one
to the other: “Small blame is it that Trojans and well-greaved Achaians
should for such a woman long time suffer hardships; marvellously like
is she to the immortal goddesses to look upon. Yet even so, though she
be so goodly, let her go upon their ships and not stay to vex us and
our children after us.”

So said they, and Priam lifted up his voice and called to Helen: “Come
hither, dear child, and sit before me, that thou mayest see thy former
husband and they kinsfolk and thy friends. I hold thee not to blame;
nay, I hold the gods to blame who brought on me the dolorous war of the
Achaians—so mayest thou now tell me who is this huge hero, this Achaian
warrior so goodly and great. Of a truth there are others even taller by
a head; yet mine eyes never behold a man so beautiful nor so royal; for
he is like unto one that is a king.”

And Helen, fair among women, spake and answered him: “Reverend art thou
to me and dread, dear father of my lord; would that sore death had been
my pleasure when I followed thy son hither, and left my home and my
kinsfolk and my daughter in her girlhood and the lovely company of mine
age-fellows. But that was not so, wherefore I pine with weeping. Now
will I tell thee that whereof thou askest me and enquirest. This is
Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, one that is both a goodly king and
mighty spearman. And he was my husband’s brother to me, ah shameless
me; if ever such an one there was.”

So said she, and the old man marvelled at him, and said: “Ah, happy
Atreides, child of fortune, blest of heaven; now know I that many sons
of the Achaians are subject to thee. Erewhile fared I to Phrygia, the
land of vines, and there saw I that the men of Phrygia, they of the
nimble steeds, were very many, even the hosts of Otreus and godlike
Mygdon, that were then encamped along the banks of Sangarios. For I too
being their ally was numbered among them on the day that the Amazons
came, the peers of men. Yet were not even they so many as are the
glancing-eyed Achaians.”

And next the old man saw Odysseus, and asked: “Come now, tell me of
this man too, dear child, who is he, shorter by a head than Agamemnon
son of Atreus, but broader of shoulder and of chest to behold? His
armour lieth upon the bounteous earth, and himself like a bell-wether
rangeth the ranks of warriors. Yea, I liken him to a thick-fleeced ram
ordering a great flock of ewes.”

Then Helen sprung of Zeus made answer to him: “Now this is Laertes’
son, crafty Odysseus, that was reared in the realm of Ithaka, rugged
though it be, and skilled in all the ways of wile and cunning device.”

Then sage Antenor made answer to her: “Lady, verily the thing thou
sayest is true indeed, for erst came goodly Odysseus hither also on an
embassage for thee, in the company of Menelaos dear to Ares; and I gave
them entertainment and welcomed them in my halls, and learnt the aspect
of both and their wise devices. Now when they mingled with the Trojans
in the assembly, while all stood up Menelaos overpassed them all by the
measure of his broad shoulders; but when both sat down, Odysseus was
the more stately. And when they began to weave the web of words and
counsel in the face of all, then Menelaos harangued fluently, in few
words, but very clearly, seeing he was not long of speech, neither
random, though in years he was the younger. But whenever Odysseus full
of wiles rose up, he stood and looked down, with eyes fixed upon the
ground, and waved not his staff whether backwards or forwards, but held
it stiff, like to a man of no understanding; one would deem him to be
churlish, and naught but a fool. But when he uttered his great voice
from his chest, and words like unto the snowflakes of winter, then
could no mortal man contend with Odysseus; then marvelled we not thus
to behold Odysseus’ aspect.”

And thirdly the old man say Aias, and asked: “Who then is this other
Achaian warrior, goodly and great, preeminent among the Archives by the
measure of his head and broad shoulders?”

And long-robed Helen, fair among women, answered: “This is huge Aias,
bulwark of the Achaians. And on the other side amid the Cretans
standeth Idomeneus like a god, and about him are gathered the captains
of the Cretans. Oft did Menelaos dear to Ares entertain him in our
house whene’er he came from Crete. And now behold I all the other
glancing-eyed Achaians, whom well I could discern and tell their names;
but two captains of the host can I not see, even Kastor tamer of horses
and Polydeukes the skilful boxer, mine own brethren, whom the same
mother bare. Either they came not in the company from lovely
Lakedaimon; or they came hither indeed in their seafaring ships, but
now will not enter into the battle of the warriors, for fear of the
many scornings and revilings that are mine.”

So said she; but them the life-giving earth held fast there in

Lakedaimon, in their dear native land.

Meanwhile were the heralds bearing through the city the holy
oath-offerings, two lambs and strong-hearted wine, the fruit of the
earth, in a goat-skin bottle. And the herald Idaios bare the shining
bowl and golden cups; and came to the old man and summoned him and
said: “Rise, thou son of Laomedon. The chieftains of the horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians call on thee to go down into the plain,
that ye may pledge a trusty oath. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to
Ares will fight with their long spears for the lady’s sake; and let
lady and treasure go with him that shall conquer. And may we that are
left pledge friendship and trusty oaths and dwell in deep-soiled Troy,
and they shall depart to Argos pasture-land of horses and Achaia home
of fair women.”

So said he, and the old man shuddered and base his companions yoke the
horses; and they with speed obeyed. Then Priam mounted and drew back
the reins, and by his side Antenor mounted the splendid chariot. So the
two drave the fleet horses through the Skaian gates to the plain. And
when they had come even to the Trojans and Achaians, they went down
from the chariots upon the bounteous earth, and marched into the midst
of Trojans and Achaians. Then forthwith rose up Agamemnon king of men,
and up rose Odysseus the man of wiles; and the lordly heralds gathered
together the holy oath-offerings of the gods, and mingled the wine in a
bowl, and poured water over the princes’ hands. And Atreides put forth
his hand and drew his knife that hung ever beside his sword’s great
sheath, and cut the hair from off the lambs’ heads; and then the
heralds portioned it among the chief of the Trojans and Achaians. Then
in their midst Atreus’ son lifted up his hands and prayed aloud:
“Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, and thou
Sun that seest all things and hearest all things, and ye Rivers and
thou Earth, and ye that in the underworld punish men outworn, whosoever
sweareth falsely; be ye witnesses, and watch over the faithful oath. If
Alexandros slay Menelaos, then let him have Helen to himself and all
her possessions; and we will depart on our seafaring ships. But if
golden-haired Menelaos slay Alexandros, then let the Trojans give back
Helen and all her possessions and pay the Argives the recompense that
is seemly, such as shall live among men that shall be hereafter. But if
so be that Priam and Priam’s sons will not pay the recompense unto me
when Alexandros falleth, then will I fight on thereafter for the price
of sin, and abide here till I compass the end of war.”

So said he, and cut the lambs’ throats with the pitiless knife. Them he
laid gasping upon the ground, failing of breath, for the knife had
taken their strength from them; and next they drew the wine from the
bowl into the cups, and poured it forth and prayed to the gods that
live for ever. And thus would say many an one of Achaians and Trojans:
“Zeus most glorious, most great, and all ye immortal gods, which folk
soe’er be first to sin against the oaths, may their brains be so poured
forth upon the earth even as this wine, theirs and their childrel’s;
and let their wives be made subject unto strangers.”

So spake they, but the son of Kronos vouchsafed not yet fulfilment. And
in their midst Priam of the seed of Dardanos uttered his saying:
“Hearken to me, Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. I verily will return
back to windy Ilios, seeing that I can in no wise bear to behold with
mine eyes my dear son fighting with Menelaos dear to Ares. But Zeus
knoweth, and all the immortal gods, for whether of the twain the doom
of death is appointed.”

So spake the godlike man, and laid the lambs in his chariot, and
entered in himself, and drew back the reins; and by his side Antenor
mounted the splendid chariot. So they departed back again to Ilios; and
Hector son of Priam and goodly Odysseus first meted out a space, and
then they took the lots, and shook them in a bronze-bound helmet, to
know whether of the twain should first cast his spear of bronze. And
the people prayed and lifted up their hands to the gods; and thus would
say many an one of Achaians and Trojans: “Father Zeus, that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great; whichsoe’er it be that brought this
trouble upon both peoples, vouchsafe that he may die and enter the
house of Hades; that so for us peace may be assured and trusty oaths.”

So said they; and great Hector of the glancing plume shook the helmet,
looking behind him; and quickly leapt forth the lot of Paris. Then the
people sat them down by ranks where each mal’s high-stepping horses and
inwrought armour lay. And upon his shoulders goodly Alexandros donned
his beauteous armour, even he that was lord to Helen of the lovely
hair. First upon his legs set he his greaves, beautiful, fastened with
silver ankle-clasps; next upon his breast he donned the corslet of his
brother Lykaon, and fitted it upon himself. And over his shoulders cast
he his silver-studded sword of bronze, and then a shield great and
sturdy. And on his mighty head he set a wrought helmet of horse-hair
crest, whereover the plume nodded terribly, and he took him a strong
spear fitted to his grasp. And in like wise warlike Menelaos donned his
armour.

So when they had armed themselves on either side in the throng, they
strode between Trojans and Achaians, fierce of aspect, and wonder came
on them that beheld, both on the Trojans tamers of horses and on the
well-greaved Achaians. Then took they their stand near together in the
measured space, brandishing their spears in wrath each against other.
First Alexandros hurled his far shadowing spear, and smote on Atreides’
round shield; but the bronze brake not through, for its point was
turned in the stout shield. Next Menelaos son of Atreus lifted up his
hand to cast, and made prayer to father Zeus: “King Zeus, grant me
revenge on him that was first to do me wrong, even on goodly
Alexandros, and subdue thou him at my hands; so that many an one of men
that shall be hereafter may shudder to wrong his host that hath shown
him kindness.”

So said he, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled, and smote
on the round shield of the son of Priam. Through the bright shield went
the ponderous spear and through the inwrought breastplate it pressed
on; and straight beside his flank the spear rent the tunic, but he
swerved and escaped black death. Then Atreides drew his silver-studded
sword, and lifted up his hand and smote the helmet-ridge; but the sword
shattered upon it into three, yea four, and fell from his hand. Thereat
Atreides looked up to the wide heaven and cried: “Father Zeus, surely
none of the gods is crueller than thou. Verily I thought to have gotten
vengeance on Alexandros for his wickedness, but now my sword breaketh
in my hand, and my spear sped from my grasp in vain, and I have not
smitten him.”

So saying, he leapt upon him and caught him by his horse-hair crest,
and swinging him round dragged him towards the well-greaved Achaians;
and he was strangled by the embroidered strap beneath his soft throat,
drawn tight below his chin to hold his helm. Now would Menelaos have
dragged him away and won glory unspeakable, but that Zeus’ daughter
Aphrodite was swift to mark, and tore asunder for him the strap of
slaughtered ox’s hide; so the helmet came away empty in his stalwart
hand. Thereat Menelaos cast it with a swing toward the well-greaved
Achaians, and his trusty comrades took it up; and himself sprang back
again eager to slay him with spear of bronze. But Aphrodite snatched up
Paris, very easily as a goddess may, and hid him in thick darkness, and
sent him down in his fragrant perfumed chamber; and herself went to
summon Helen. Her she found on the high tower, and about her the Trojan
women thronged. So with her hand she plucked her perfumed raiment and
shook it and spake to her in the likeness of an aged dame, a
wool-comber that was wont to work for her fair wool when she dwelt in
Lakedaimon, whom too she greatly loved. Even in her likeness fair
Aphrodite spake: “Come hither; Alexandros summoneth thee to go
homeward. There is he in his chamber and inlaid bed, radiant in beauty
and vesture; nor wouldst thou deem him to be come from fighting his
foe, but rather to be faring to the dance, or from the dance to be just
resting and set down.”

So said she, and stirred Helel’s soul within her breast; and when now
she marked the fair neck and lovely breast and sparkling eyes of the
goddess, she marvelled straightway and spake a word and called upon her
name: “Strange queen, why art thou desirous now to beguile me? Verily
thou wilt lead me further on to some one of the people cities of
Phrygia or lovely Maionia, if there too thou hast perchance some other
darling among mortal men, because even now Menelaos hath conquered
goodly Alexandros, and will lead me, accursed me, to his home.
Therefore thou comest hither with guileful intent. Go and sit thou by
his side and depart from the way of the gods; neither let thy feet ever
bear thee back to Olympus, but still be vexed for his sake and guard
him till he make thee his wife or perchance his slave. But thither will
I not go— that were a sinful thing—to array the bed of him; all the
women of Troy will blame me thereafter; and I have griefs untold within
my soul.”

Then in wrath bright Aphrodite spake to her: “Provoke me not, rash
woman, lest in mine anger I desert thee, and hate thee even as now I
love thee beyond measure, and lest I devise grievous enmities between
both, even betwixt Trojans and Achaians, and so thou perish in evil
wise.”

So said she, and Helen sprung of Zeus was afraid, and went wrapped in
her bright radiant vesture, silently, and the Trojan women marked her
not; and the goddess led the way.

Now when they were come to the beautiful house of Alexandros the
handmaidens turned straightway to their tasks, and the fair lady went
to the high-roofed chamber; and laughter-loving Aphrodite took for her
a chair and brought it, even she the goddess, and set it before the
face of Paris. There Helen took her seat, the child of aegis-bearing
Zeus, and with eyes turned askance spake and chode her lord: “Thou
comest back from battle; would thou hadst perished there, vanquished of
that great warrior that was my former husband. Verily it was once thy
boast that thou wast a better man than Menelaos dear to Ares, in the
might of thine arm and thy spear. But go now, challenge Menelaos, dear
to Ares to fight thee again face to face. Nay, but I, even I, bid thee
refrain, nor fight a fight with golden-haired Menelaos man to man,
neither attack him recklessly, lest perchance thou fall to his spear
anon.”

And Paris made answer to her and said: “Chide not my soul, lady, with
cruel taunts. For now indeed hath Menelaos vanquished me with Athene’s
aid, but another day may I do so unto him; for we too have gods with
us. But come now, let us have joy of love upon our couch; for never yet
hath love so enwrapped my heart—not even then when first I snatched
thee from lovely Lakedaimon and sailed with thee on my sea-faring
ships, and in the isle of Kranae had converse with thee upon thy couch
in love—as I love thee now and sweet desire taketh hold upon me.” So
saying he led the way to the couch, and the lady followed with him.

Thus laid they them upon their fretted couch; but Atreides the while
strode through the host like to a wild beast, if anywhere he might set
eyes on godlike Alexandros. But none of the Trojans or their famed
allies could discover Alexandros to Menelaos dear to Ares. Yet surely
did they in no wise hide him for kindliness, could any have seen him;
for he was hated of all even as black death. So Agamemnon king of men
spake among them there: “Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and
allies. Now is victory declared for Menelaos dear to Ares; give ye back
Helen of Argos and the possessions with her, and pay ye the recompense
such as is seemly, that it may live even among men that shall be
hereafter.” So said Atreides, and all the Achaians gave assent.



BOOK IV.

How Pandaros wounded Menelaos by treachery; and Agamemnon exhorted his
chief captains to battle.


Now the gods sat by Zeus and held assembly on the golden floor, and in
the midst the lady Hebe poured them their nectar: they with golden
goblets pledged one another, and gazed upon the city of the Trojans.
Then did Kronos’ son essay to provoke Hera with vexing words, and spake
maliciously: “Twain goddesses hath Menelaos for his helpers, even Hera
of Argos and Alalkomenean Athene. Yet these sit apart and take there
pleasure in beholding; but beside that other ever standeth
laughter-loving Aphrodite and wardeth off fate from him, and now hath
she saved him as he thought to perish. But of a truth the victory is to
Menelaos dear to Ares; so let us take thought how these things shall
be; whether once more we shall arouse ill war and the dread battle-din,
or put friendship between the foes. Moreover if this were welcome to
all and well pleasing, may the city of king Priam yet be an habitation,
and Menelaos take back Helen of Argos.”

So said he, but Athene and Hera murmured thereat, who were sitting by
him and devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace and
said not anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold
upon her: But Hera’s breast contained not her anger, and she spake:
“Most dread son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? How hast
thou the will to make my labour void and of none effect, and the sweat
of my toil that I sweated, when my horses were wearied with my
summoning of the host, to be the plague of Priam and his sons? Do as
thou wilt; but we other gods do not all approve thee.”

Then in sore anger Zeus the cloud-gatherer spake to her: “Good lack,
how have Priam and Priam’s sons done thee such great wrong that thou
art furiously minded to sack the established citadel of Ilios?
Perchance wert thou to enter within the gates and long walls and devour
Priam raw, and Priam’s sons and all the Trojans, then mightest thou
assuage thine anger. Do as thou art minded, only let not this quarrel
hereafter be to me and thee a sore strife between us both. And this
moreover will I say to thee, and do thou lay it to they heart; whene’er
I too be of eager mind to lay waste to a city where is the race of men
that are dear to thee, hinder thou not my wrath, but let me be, even as
I yield to thee of free will, yet with soul unwilling. For all cities
beneath sun and starry heaven that are the dwelling of mortal men, holy
Ilios was most honoured of my heart, and Priam and the folk of Priam of
the good ashen spear. For never did mine altar lack the seemly feast,
even drink-offering and burnt-offering, the worship that is our due.”

Then Helen the ox-eyed queen made answer to him: “Of a surety three
cities are there that are dearest far to me, Argos and Sparta and
wide-wayed Mykene; these lay thou waste whene’er they are found hateful
to thy heart; not for them will I stand forth, nor do I grudge thee
them. For even if I be jealous and would forbid thee to overthrow them,
yet will my jealousy not avail, seeing that thou art stronger far than
I. Still must my labour too not be made of none effect; for I also am a
god, and my lineage is even as thine, and Kronos the crooked counsellor
begat me to the place of honour in double wise, by birthright, and
because I am named thy spouse, and thou art king among all the
immortals. Let us indeed yield each to other herein, I to thee and thou
to me, and the rest of the immortal gods will follow with us; and do
thou with speed charge Athene to betake her to the fierce battle din of
Trojans and Achaians, and to essay that the Trojans may first take upon
them to do violence to the Achaians in their triumph, despite the
oaths.”

So said she, and the father of men and gods disregarded not; forthwith
he spake to Athene winged words: “Betake thee with all speed to the
host, to the midst of Trojans and Achaians, and essay that the Trojans
may first take upon them to do violence to the Achaians in their
triumph, despite the oaths.”

So spake he, and roused Athene that already was set thereon; and from
Olympus’ heights she darted down. Even as the son of Kronos the crooked
counsellor sendeth a star, a portent for mariners or a wide host of
men, bright shining, and therefrom are scattered sparks in multitude;
even in such guise sped Pallas Athene to earth, and leapt into their
midst; and astonishment came on them that beheld, on horse-taming
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. And thus would many an one say,
looking at his neighbor: “Of a surety either shall sore war and the
fierce battle din return again; or else Zeus doth stablish peace
between the foes, even he that is mel’s dispenser of battle.”

Thus would many an one of Achaians and Trojans say. Then the goddess
entered the throng of Trojans in the likeness of a man, even Antenor’s
son Laodokos, a stalwart warrior, and sought for godlike Pandaros, if
haply she might find him. Lykaol’s son found she, the noble and
stalwart, standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from the streams of Aisepos. So
she came near and spake winged words: “Wilt thou now hearken to me,
thou wise son of Lykaon? Then wouldst thou take heart to shoot a swift
arrow at Menelaos, and wouldst win favour and glory before all the
Trojans, and before king Alexandros most of all. Surely from him first
of any wouldst thou receive glorious gifts, if perchance he see
Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, vanquished by thy dart and brought to
the grievous pyre. Go to now, shoot at glorious Menelaos, and vow to
Apollo, the son of light [Or, perhaps, “the Wolf-born”], the lord of
archery, to sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when thou
art returned to thy home, in the city of holy Zeleia.”

So spake Athene, and persuaded his fool’s heart. Forthwith he
unsheathed his polished bow of horn of a wild ibex that he himself had
erst smitten beneath the breast as it came forth from a rock, the while
he awaited in a lurking-place; and had pierced it in the chest, so that
it fell backward on the rock. Now from its head sprang there horns of
sixteen palms; these the artificer, even the worker in horn, joined
cunningly together, and polished them all well and set the top of gold
thereon. So he laid it down when he had well strung it, by resting it
upon the ground; and his staunch comrades held their shields before
him, lest the warrior sons of the Achaians should first set on them,
ere Menelaos, Atreus’ son, were smitten. Then opened he the lid of his
quiver and took forth a feathered arrow, never yet shot, a source of
grievous pangs; and anon he laid the bitter dart upon the string and
vowed to Apollo, the son of light, the lord of archery, to sacrifice a
goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when he should have returned to his
home in the city of holy Zeleia. Then he took the notch and string of
oxes’ sinew together, and drew, bringing to his breast the string, and
to the bow the iron head. So when he had now bent the great bow into a
round, the horn twanged, and the string sang aloud, and the keen arrow
leapt eager to wing his way amid the throng.

But the blessed gods immortal forgat not thee, Menelaos; and before all
the daughter of Zeus, the driver of the spoil, who stood before thee
and warded off the piercing dart. She turned it just aside from the
flesh, even as a mother driveth a fly from her child that lieth in
sweet slumber; and with her own hand guided it where the golden buckles
of the belt were clasped and the doubled breastplate met them. So the
bitter arrow lighted upon the firm belt; through the inwrought belt it
sped and through the curiously wrought breastplate it pressed on and
through the taslet [and apron or belt set with metal, worn below the
corslet] he wore to shield his flesh, a barrier against darts; and this
best shielded him, yet it passed on even through this. Then did the
arrow graze the warrior’s outermost flesh, and forthwith the dusky
blood flowed from the wound.

As when some woman of Maionia or Karia staineth ivory with purple, to
make a cheek-piece for horses, and it is laid up in the treasure
chamber, and many a horseman prayeth for it to wear; but it is laid up
to be a king’s boast, alike an adornment for his horse and a glory for
his charioteer; even in such wise, Menelaos, were thy shapely thighs
stained with blood and thy legs and thy fair ankles beneath.

Thereat shuddered Agamemnon king of men when he saw the black blood
flowing from the wound. And Menelaos dear to Ares likewise shuddered;
but when he saw how thread [by which the iron head was attached to the
shaft] and bards were without, his spirit was gathered in his breast
again. Then lord Agamemnon moaned deep, and spake among them, holding
Menelaos by the hand; and his comrades made moan the while: “Dear
brother, to thy death, meseemeth, pledged I these oaths, setting thee
forth to fight the Trojans alone before the face of the Achaians;
seeing that the Trojans have so smitten thee, and trodden under floor
the trusty oaths. Yet in no wise is an oath of none effect, and the
blood of lambs and pure drink-offerings and the right hands of
fellowship wherein we trusted. For even if the Olympian bring not about
the fulfilment forthwith, yet doth he fulfil at last, and men make dear
amends, even with their own heads and their wives and little ones. Yea
of a surety I know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy
Ilios to be laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen
spear; and Zeus the son of Kronos enthroned on high, that dwelleth in
the heaven, himself shall brandish over them all his lowring aegis, in
indignation at this deceit. Then shall all this not be void; yet shall
I have sore sorrow for thee, Menelaos, if thou die and fulfil the lot
of life. Yea in utter shame should I return to thirsty Argos, seeing
that the Achaians will forthwith bethink them of their native land, and
so should we leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of
Argos. And the earth shall rot thy bones as thou liest in Troy with thy
task unfinished: and thus shall many an overweening Trojan say as he
leapeth upon the tomb of glorious Menelaos: ‘Would to God Agamemnon
might so fulfil his wrath in every matter, even as now he led hither
the host of the Achaians for naught, and hath gone home again to his
dear native land with empty ships, and hath left noble Menelaos
behind.’ Thus shall men say hereafter: in that day let the wide earth
gape for me.”

But golden-haired Menelaos encouraged him and said: “Be of good
courage, neither dismay at all the host of the Achaians. The keen dart
lighted not upon a deadly spot; my glistening belt in front stayed it,
and the kirtle of mail beneath, and the taslet that the coppersmiths
fashioned.”

Then lord Agamemnon answered him and said: “Would it may be so, dear
Menelaos. But the leech shall feel the wound, and lay thereon drugs
that shall assuage thy dire pangs.”

So saying he spake to godlike Talthybios, his herald: “Talthybios, with
all speed call Machaon hither, the hero son of Asklepios the noble
leech, to see Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, whom one well skilled in
archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath wounded with a bow-shot, to his
glory and our grief.”

So said he, and the herald heard him and disregarded not, and went his
way through the host of mail-clad Achaians to spy out the hero Machaon.
Him he found standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from Trike, pasture land of
horses. So he came near and spake his winged words: “Arise, thou son of
Asklepios. Lord Agamemnon calleth thee to see Menelaos, captain of the
Achaians, whom one well skilled in archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath
wounded with a bow-shot, to his glory and our grief.”

So saying he aroused his spirit in his breast, and they went their way
amid the throng, through the wide host of the Achaians. And when they
were now come where was golden-haired Menelaos wounded, and all as many
as were chieftains gathered around him in a circle, the godlike hero
came and stood in their midst, and anon drew forth the arrow from the
clasped belt; and as it was drawn forth the keen barbs were broken
backwards. Then he loosed the glistering belt and kirtle of mail
beneath and taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned; and when he saw the
wound where the bitter arrow had lighted, he sucked out the blood and
cunningly spread thereon soothing drugs, such as Cheiron of his good
will had imparted to his sire.

While these were tending Menelaos of the loud war-cry, the ranks of
shield-bearing Trojans came on; so the Achaians donned their arms
again, and bethought them of the fray. Now wouldest thou not see noble
Agamemnon slumbering, nor cowering, unready to fight, but very eager
for glorious battle. He left his horses and his chariot adorned with
bronze; and his squire, even Eurymedon son of Ptolemaios Peiraieus’
son, kept apart the snorting steeds; and he straitly charged him to
have them at hand whenever weariness should come upon his limbs with
marshalling so many; and thus on foot ranged he through the ranks of
warriors. And whomsoever of all the fleet-horsed Danaans he found
eager, he stood by them and by his words encouraged them: “Ye Argives,
relax not in any wise your impetuous valour; for father Zeus will be no
helper of liars, but as these were first to transgress against the
oaths, so shall their own tender flesh be eaten of the vultures, and we
shall bear away their dear wives and little children in our ships, when
once we take the stronghold.”

But whomsoever he found shrinking from hateful battle, these he chode
sore with angry words: “Ye Argives, warriors of the bow, ye men of
dishonour, have ye no shame? Why stand ye thus dazed like fawns that
are weary with running over the long plain and so stand still, and no
valour is found in their hearts at all? Even thus stand ye dazed, and
fight not. Is it that ye wait for the Trojans to come near where your
good ships’ sterns are drawn up on the shore of the grey sea, to see if
Kronion will stretch his arm over you indeed?”

So masterfully ranged he through the ranks of warriors. Then came he to
the Cretans as he went through the throng of warriors; and these were
taking arms around wise Idomeneus; Idomeneus amid the foremost, valiant
as a wild boar, and Meriones the while was hastening his hindermost
battalions. Then Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to see them, and anon
spake to Idomeneus with kindly words: “Idomeneus, more than all the
fleet-horsed Danaans do I honour thee, whether in war or in task of
other sort or in the feast, when the chieftains of the Argives mingle
in the bowl the gleaming wine of the counsellor. For even though all
the other flowing-haired Achaians drink one allotted portion, yet thy
cup standeth ever full even as mine, to drink as oft as they soul
biddeth thee. Now arouse thee to war like such an one as thou avowest
thyself to be of old.”

And Idomeneus the captain of the Cretans made answer to him: “Atreides,
of very truth will I be to thee a trusty comrade even as at the first I
promised and gave my pledge; but do thou urge on all the flowing-haired
Achaians, that we may fight will all speed, seeing the Trojans have
disannulled the oaths. But for all that death and sorrow hereafter
shall be their lot, because they were the first to transgress against
the oaths.”

So said he, and Agamemnon passed on glad at heart. Then came he to the
Aiantes as he went through the throng of warriors; and these twain were
arming, and a cloud of footmen followed with them. Even as when a
goatherd from a place of outlook seeth a cloud coming across the deep
before the blast of the west wind; and to him being afar it seemeth
ever blacker, even as pitch, as it goeth along the deep, and bringeth a
great whirlwind, and he shuddereth to see it and driveth his flock
beneath a cave; even in such wise moved the serried battalions of young
men, the fosterlings of Zeus, by the side of the Aiantes into furious
war, battalions dark of line, bristling with shields and spears. And
lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see them and spake to them winged words, and
said: “Aiantes, leaders of the mail-clad Argives, to you twain, seeing
it is not seemly to urge you, give I no charge; for of your own selves
ye do indeed bid your folk to fight amain. Ah, father Zeus and Athene
and Apollo, would that all had like spirit in their breasts; then would
king Priam’s city soon bow captive and wasted beneath our hands.”

So saying he left them there, and went to others. Then found he Nestor,
the clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, arraying his comrades, and
urging them to fight, around great Pelegon and Alastor and Chromios and
lord Haimon and Bias shepherd of the host. And first he arrayed the
horsemen with horses and chariots, and behind them the footmen many and
brave, to be a bulwark of battle; but the cowards he drave into the
midst, that every man, even though he would not, yet of necessity must
fight. First he laid charge upon the horsemen; these he bade hold in
their horses nor be entangled in the throng. “Neither let any man,
trusting in his horsemanship and manhood, be eager to fight the Trojans
alone and before the rest, nor yet let him draw back, for so will ye be
enfeebled. But whomsoever a warrior from the place of his own car can
come at a chariot of the foe, let him thrust forth with his spear; even
so is the far better way. Thus moreover did men of old time lay low
cities and walls, because they had this mind and spirit in their
breasts.”

So did the old man charge them, being well skilled of yore in battles.
And lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see hem, and spake to him winged words,
and said: “Old man, would to god that, even as thy spirit is in thine
own breast, thy limbs might obey and thy strength be unabated. But the
common lot of age is heavy upon thee; would that it had come upon some
other man, and thou wert amid the young.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Atreides, I verily, even
I too, would wish to be as on the day when I slew noble Ereuthalion.
But the gods in no wise grant men all things at once. As I was then a
youth, so doth old age now beset me. Yet even so will I abide among the
horsemen and urge them by counsel and words; for that is the right of
elders. But the young men shall wield the spear, they that are more
youthful than I and have confidence in their strength.”

So spake he, and Atreides passed on glad at heart. He found Menestheus
the charioteer, the son of Peteos, standing still, and round him were
the Athenians, masters of the battle-cry. And hard by stood crafty
Odysseus, and round about him the ranks of Kephallenians, no feeble
folk, stood still; for their host had not yet heard the battle-cry,
seeing the battalions of horse-taming Trojans and Achaians had but just
bestirred them to move; so these stood still tarrying till some other
column of the Achaians should advance to set upon the Trojans and begin
the battle. But when Agamemnon king of men saw it, he upbraided them,
and spake to them winged words, saying: “O son of king Peteos
fosterling of Zeus, and thou skilled in evil wiles, thou cunning of
mind, why stand ye shrinking apart, and tarry for others? You beseemeth
it to stand in your place amid the foremost and to front the fiery
battle; for ye are the first to hear my bidding to the feast, as oft as
we Achaians prepare a feast for the counsellors. Then are ye glad to
eat roast meat and drink your cups of honey-sweet wine as long as ye
will. But now would ye gladly behold it, yea, if ten columns of
Achaians in front of you were fighting with the pitiless sword.”

But Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely at him and said:
“Atreides, what word is this that hath escaped the barrier of thy lips?
How sayest thou that we are slack in battle? When once our [Or, “that
we are slack in battle, when once we Achaians,” putting the note of
interrogation after “tamers of horses.”] Achaians launch furious war on
the Trojans, tamers of horses, then shalt thou, if thou wilt, and if
thou hast any care therefor, behold Telemachos’ dear father mingling
with the champions of the Trojans, the tamers of horses. But that thou
sayest is empty as air.”

Then lord Agamemnon spake to him smiling, seeing how he was wroth, and
took back his saying: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus full of
devices, neither do I chide thee beyond measure nor urge thee; for I
know that thy heart within thy breast is kindly disposed; for thy
thoughts are as my thoughts. Go to, we will make amends hereafter, if
any ill word hath been spoken now; may the gods bring it all to none
effect.”

So saying he left them there and went on to others. The son of Tydeus
found he, high-hearted Diomedes, standing still with horses and chariot
well compact; and by him stood Sthenelos son of Kapaneus. Him lord
Agamemnon saw and upbraided, and spake to him winged words, and said:
“Ah me, thou son of wise Tydeus tamer of horses, why shrinkest thou,
why gazest thou at the highways of the battle? Not thus was Tydeus wont
to shrink, but rather to fight his enemies far in front of his dear
comrades, as they say that beheld him at the task; for never did I meet
him nor behold him, but men say that he was preeminent amid all. Of a
truth he came to Mykene, not in enmity, but as a guest with godlike
Polyneikes, to raise him an army for the war that they were levying
against the holy walls of Thebes; and they besought earnestly that
valiant allies might be given them, and our folk were fain to grant
them and made assent to their entreaty, only Zeus showed omens of ill
and turned their minds. So when these were departed and were come on
their way, and had attained to Asopos deep in rushes, that maketh his
bed in grass, there did the Achaians appoint Tydeus to be their
ambassador. So he went and found the multitude of the sons of Kadmos
feasting in the palace of mighty Eteokles. Yet was knightly Tydeus,
even though a stranger, not afraid, being alone amid the multitude of
the Kadmeians, but challenged them all to feats of strength, and in
every one vanquished he them easily; so present a helper was Athene
unto him. But the Kadmeians, the urgers of horses, were wroth, and as
he fared back again they brought and set a strong ambush, even fifty
young men, whose leaders were twain, Maion son of Haimon, like to the
immortals, and Autophonos’ son Polyphontes staunch in battle. Still
even on the Tydeus brought shameful death; he slew them all, save one
that he sent home alone; Maion to wit he sent away in obedience to the
omens of heaven. Such was Tydeus of Aitolia; but he begat a son that in
battle is worse than he; only in harangue is he the better.”

So said he, and stalwart Diomedes made no answer, but had respect to
the chiding of the king revered. But the son of glorious Kapaneus
answered him: “Atreides, utter not falsehood, seeing thou knowest how
to speak truly. We avow ourselves to be better men by far than our
fathers were: we did take the seat of Thebes the seven gated, though we
led a scantier host against a stronger wall, because we followed the
omens of the gods and the salvation of Zeus; but they perished by their
own iniquities. Do not thou therefore in any wise have our fathers in
like honour with us.”

But stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him, and said: “Brother, sit
silent and obey my saying. I grudge not that Agamemnon shepherd of the
host should urge on the well-greaved Achaians to fight; for him the
glory will attend if the Achaians lay the Trojans low and take holy
Ilios; and his will be the great sorrow if the Achaians be laid low. Go
to now, let us too bethink us of impetuous valour.”

He spake and leapt in his armour from the chariot to earth, and
terribly rang the bronze upon the chieftail’s breast as he moved;
thereat might fear have come even upon one stout-hearted.

As when on the echoing beach the sea-wave lifteth up itself in close
array before the driving of the west wind; out on the deep doth it
first raise its head, and then breaketh upon the land and belloweth
aloud and goeth with arching crest about the promontories, and speweth
the foaming brine afar; even so in close array moved the battalions of
the Danaans without pause to battle. Each captain gave his men the
word, and the rest went silently; thou wouldest not deem that all the
great host following them had any voice within their breasts; in
silence feared they their captains. On every man glittered the
inwrought armour wherewith they went clad. But for the Trojans, like
sheep beyond number that stand in the courtyard of a man of great
substance, to be milked of their white milk, and bleat without ceasing
to hear their lambs’ cry, even so arose the clamour of the Trojans
through the wide host. For they had not all like speech nor one
language, but their tongues were mingled, and they were brought from
many lands. These were urged on of Ares, and those of bright-eyed
Athene, and Terror and Rout, and Strife whose fury wearieth not, sister
and friend of murderous Ares; her crest is but lowly at the first, but
afterward she holdeth up her head in heaven and her feet walk upon the
earth. She now cast common discord in their midst, as she fared through
the throng and made the lamentation of men to wax.

Now when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed
they targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed
shields pressed each on each and mighty din arose. Then were heard the
voice of groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and
the slain, and the earth streamed with blood. As when two winter
torrents flow down the mountains to a watersmeet and join their furious
flood within the ravine from their great springs, and the shepherd
heareth the roaring far off among the hills: even so from the joining
of battle came there forth shouting and travail. Antilochos first slew
a Trojan warrior in full array, valiant amid the champions, Echepolos
son of Thalysios; him was he first to smite upon the ridge of his
crested helmet, and he drave the spear into his brow and the point of
bronze passed within the bone; darkness clouded his eyes, and he
crashed like a tower amid the press of fight. As he fell lord Elephenor
caught him by the foot, Chalkodol’s son, captain of the great-hearted
Abantes, and dragged him from beneath the darts, eager with all speed
to despoil him of his armour. Yet but for a little endured his essay;
great-hearted Agenor saw him haling away the corpse, and where his side
was left uncovered of his buckler as he bowed him down, there smote he
him with bronze-tipped spear-shaft and unstrung his limbs. So his life
departed from him, and over his corpse the task of Trojans and Achaians
grew hot; like wolves leapt they one at another, and man lashed at man.

Next Telamonian Aias smote Anthemiol’s son, the lusty stripling
Simoeisios, whose erst is mother bare beside the banks of Simoeis on
the way down from Ida whither she had followed with her parents to see
their flocks. Therefore they called him Simoeisios, but he repaid not
his dear parents the recompense of his nurture; scanty was his span of
life by reason of the spear of great-hearted Aias that laid him low.
For as he went he first was smitten on his right breast beside the pap;
straight though his shoulder passed the spear of bronze, and he fell to
the ground in the dust like a poplar-tree, that hath grown up smooth in
the lowland of a great marsh, and its branches grow upon the top
thereof; this hath a wainwright felled with gleaming steel, to bend him
a felloe for a goodly chariot, and so it lies drying by a river’s
banks. In such a fashion did heaven-sprung Aias slay Simoeisios son of
Anthemion; then at him Antiphos of the glancing corslet, Priam’s son,
made a cast with his keen javelin across the throng. Him he missed, but
smote Odysseus’ valiant comrade Leukos in the groin as he drew the
corpse his way, so that he fell upon it and the body dropped from his
hands. Then Odysseus was very wroth at heart for the slaying of him,
and strode through the forefront of the battle harnessed in flashing
bronze, and went and stood hard by and glanced around him, and cast his
bright javelin; and the Trojans shrank before the casting of the hero.
He sped not the dart in vain, but smote Demokoon, Priam’s bastard son
that had come to him from tending his fleet mares in Abydos. Him
Odysseus, being wroth for his comrade’s sake, smote with his javelin on
one temple; and through both temples passed the point of bronze, and
darkness clouded his eyes, and he fell with a crash and his armour
clanged upon him. Then the forefighters and glorious Hector yielded,
and the Argives shouted aloud, and drew the bodies unto them, and
pressed yet further onward. But Apollo looked down from Pergamos, and
had indignation, and with a shout called to the Trojans: “Arise, ye
Trojans, tamers of horses; yield not to the Argives in fight; not of
stone nor iron is their flesh, that it should resist the piercing
bronze when they are smitten. Moreover Achilles, son of Thetis of the
fair tresses, fighteth not, but amid the ships broodeth on his bitter
anger.”

So spake the dread god from the city; and the Achaians likewise were
urged on of Zeus’ daughter the Triton-born, most glorious, as she
passed through the throng wheresoever she beheld them slackening.

Next was Diores son of Amrynkeus caught in the snare of fate; for he
was smitten by a jagged stone on the right leg hard by the ankle, and
the caster thereof was captain of the men of Thrace, Peirros son of
Imbrasos that had come from Ainos. The pitiless stone crushed utterly
the two sinews and the bones; back fell he in the dust, and stretched
out both his hands to his dear comrades, gasping out his soul. Then he
that smote him, even Peiroos, sprang at him and pierced him with a
spear beside the navel; so all his bowels gushed forth upon the ground,
and darkness clouded his eyes. But even as Peiroos departed from him
Thoas of Aitolia smote with a spear his chest above the pap, and the
point fixed in his lung. Then Thoas came close, and plucked out from
his breast the ponderous spear, and drew his sharp sword, wherewith he
smote his belly in the midst, and took his life. Yet he stripped not
off his armour; for his comrades, the men of Thrace that wear the
top-knot, stood around, their long spears in their hands, and albeit he
was great and valiant and proud they drave him off from them and he
gave ground reeling. So were the two captains stretched in the dust
side by side, he of the Thracians and he of the mail-clad Epeians; and
around them were many others likewise slain.

Now would none any more enter in and make light of the battle, could it
be that a man yet unwounded by dart or thrust of keen bronze might roam
in the midst, being led of Pallas Athene by the hand, and by her
guarded from the flying shafts. For many Trojans that day and many
Achaians were laid side by side upon their faces in the dust.



BOOK V.

How Diomedes by his great valour made havoc of the Trojans, and wounded
even Aphrodite and Ares by the help of Athene.


But now to Tydeus’ son Diomedes Athene gave might and courage, for him
to be pre-eminent amid all the Argives and win glorious renown. She
kindled flame unwearied from his helmet and shield, like to the star of
summer that above all others glittereth bright after he hath bathed in
the ocean stream. In such wise kindled she flame from his head and
shoulders and sent him into the midst, where men thronged the thickest.

Now there was amid the Trojans one Dares, rich and noble, priest of
Hephaistos; and he had two sons, Phegeus and Idaios, well skilled in
all the art of battle. These separated themselves and assailed him face
to face, they setting on him from their car and he on foot upon the
ground. And when they were now come near in onset on each other, first
Phegeus hurled his far-shadowing spear; and over Tydeides’ left
shoulder the spear point passed, and smote not his body. Then next
Tydeides made a spear-cast, and the javelin sped not from his hand in
vain, but smote his breast between the nipples, and thrust him from the
chariot. So Idaios sprang away, leaving his beautiful car, and dared
not to bestride his slain brother; else had neither he himself escaped
black fate: but Hephaistos guarded him and saved him in a veil of
darkness, that he might not have his aged priest all broken with
sorrow. And the son of great-hearted Tydeus drave away the horses and
gave them to his men to take to the hollow ships. But when the
great-hearted Trojans beheld the sons of Dares, how one was fled, and
one was slain beside his chariot, the spirit of all was stirred. But
bright-eyed Athene took impetuous Ares by the hand and spake to him and
said: “Ares, Ares, blood-stained bane of mortals, thou stormer of
walls, can we not now leave the Trojans and Achaians to fight, on
whichsoever it be that father Zeus bestoweth glory? But let us twain
give place, and escape the wrath of Zeus.”

So saying she led impetuous Ares from the battle. Then she made him sit
down beside loud Skamandros, and the Danaans pushed the Trojans back.

So they laboured in the violent mellay; but of Tydeides man could not
tell with whom he were joined, whether he consorted with Trojans or
with Achaians. For he stormed across the plain like a winter torrent at
the full, that in swift course scattereth the causeys [Causeways.];
neither can the long lines of causeys hold it in, nor the fences of
fruitful orchards stay its sudden coming when the rain of heaven
driveth it; and before it perish in multitudes the fair works of the
sons of men. Thus before Tydeides the serried battalions of the Trojans
were overthrown, and they abode him not for all they were so many.

But when Lykaol’s glorious son marked him storming across the plain,
overthrowing battalions before him, anon he bent his crooked bow
against Tydeides, and smote him as he sped onwards, hitting hard by his
right shoulder the plate of his corslet; the bitter arrow flew through
and held straight upon its way, and the corslet was dabbled with blood.
Over him then loudly shouted Lykaol’s glorious son: “Bestir you,
great-hearted Trojans, urgers of horses; the best man of the Achaians
is wounded, and I deem that he shall not for long endure the violent
dart.”

So spake he boasting; yet was the other not vanquished of the swift
dart, only he gave place and stood before his horses and his chariot
and spake to Sthenelos son of Kapaneus: “Haste thee, dear son of
Kapaneus; descend from thy chariot, to draw me from my shoulder the
bitter arrow.”

So said he, and Sthenelos leapt from his chariot to earth and stood
beside him and drew the swift shaft right through, out of his shoulder;
and the blood darted up through the pliant tunic. Then Diomedes of the
loud war-cry prayed thereat: “Hear me, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,
unwearied maiden! If ever in kindly mood thou stoodest by my father in
the heat of battle, even so now be thou likewise kind to me, Athene.
Grant me to slay this man, and bring within my spear-cast him that took
advantage to shoot me, and boasteth over me, deeming that not for long
shall I see the bright light of the sun.”

So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs
nimble, his feet and his hands withal, and came near and spake winged
words: “Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight the Trojans; for in
thy breast I have set thy father’s courage undaunted, even as it was in
knightly Tydeus, wielder of the buckler. Moreover I have taken from
thine eyes the mist that erst was on them, that thou mayest well
discern both god and man. Therefore if any god come hither to make
trial of thee, fight not thou face to face with any of the immortal
gods; save only if Aphrodite daughter of Zeus enter into the battle,
her smite thou with the keen bronze.”

So saying bright-eyed Athene went her way and Tydeides returned and
entered the forefront of the battle; even though erst his soul was
eager to do battle with the Trojans, yet now did threefold courage come
upon him, as upon a lion whom some shepherd in the field guarding his
fleecy sheep hath wounded, being sprung into the fold, yet hath not
vanquished him; he hath roused his might, and then cannot beat him
back, but lurketh amid the steading, and his forsaken flock is
affrighted; so the sheep are cast in heaps, one upon the other, and the
lion in his fury leapeth out of the high fold; even so in fury mingled
mighty Diomedes with the Trojans.

Him Aineias beheld making havoc of the ranks of warriors, and went his
way along the battle and amid the hurtling of spears, seeking godlike
Pandaros, if haply he might find him. Lykaol’s son he found, the noble
and stalwart, and stood before his face, and spake a word unto him.
“Pandaros, where now are thy bow and thy winged arrows, and the fame
wherein no man of this land rivalleth thee, nor any in Lykia boasteth
to be thy better? Go to now, lift thy hands in prayer to Zeus and shoot
thy dart at this fellow, whoe’er he be that lordeth it here and hath
already wrought the Trojans much mischief, seeing he hath unstrung the
knees of many a brave man; if indeed it be not some god wroth with the
Trojans, in anger by reason of sacrifices; the wrath of god is a sore
thing to fall on men.”

And Lykaol’s glorious son made answer to him: “Aineias, counsellor of
the mail-clad Trojans, in everything liken I him to the wise son of
Tydeus; I discern him by his shield and crested helmet, and by the
aspect of his horses; yet know I not surely if it be not a god. But if
it be the man I deem, even the wise son of Tydeus, then not without
help of a god is he thus furious, but some immortal standeth beside him
with a cloud wrapped about his shoulders and turned aside from him my
swift dart even as it lighted. For already have I shot my dart at him
and smote his right shoulder right through the breastplate of his
corslet, yea and I thought to hurl him headlong to Aidoneus, yet I
vanquished him not; surely it is some wrathful god. Already have I
aimed at two princes, Tydeus’ and Atreus’ sons, and both I smote and
surely drew forth blood, yet only roused them the more. Therefore in an
evil hour I took from the peg my curved bow on that day when I led my
Trojans to lovely Ilios, to do noble Hector pleasure. But if I return
and mine eyes behold my native land and wife and great palace
lofty-roofed, then may an alien forthwith cut my head from me if I
break not this bow with mine hands and cast it upon the blazing fire;
worthless is its service to me as air.”

Then Aineias captain of the Trojans answered him: “Nay, talk not thus;
naught shall be mended before that we with horses and chariot have gone
to face this man, and made trial of him in arms. Come then, mount upon
my car that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or for fleeing hither or thither very fleetly
across the plain; they will e’en bring us to the city safe and sound,
even though Zeus hereafter give victory to Diomedes son of Tydeus. Come
therefore, take thou the lash and shining reins, and I will stand upon
the car to fight; or else withstand thou him, and to the horses will I
look.”

To him made answer Lykaol’s glorious son: “Aineias, take thou thyself
the reins and thine own horses; better will they draw the curved car
for their wonted charioteer, if perchance it hap that we must flee from
Tydeus’ son; lest they go wild for fear and will not take us from the
fight, for lack of thy voice, and so the son of great-hearted Tydeus
attack us and slay us both and drive away the whole-hooved horses. So
drive thou thyself thy chariot and thy horses, and I will await his
onset with my keen spear.” So saying mounted they upon the well dight
chariot, and eagerly drave the fleet horses against Tydeides, And
Sthenelos, the glorious son of Kapaneus, saw them, and anon spake to
Tydeides winged words: “Diomedes son of Tydeus, dear to mine heart, I
behold two stalwart warriors eager to fight against thee, endued with
might beyond measure. The one is well skilled in the bow, even
Pandaros, and he moreover boasteth him to be Lykaol’s son; and Aineias
boasteth himself to be born son of great-hearted Anchises, and his
mother is Aphrodite. Come now, let us give place upon the chariot,
neither rage thou thus, I pray thee, in the forefront of battle, lest
perchance thou lose thy life.”

Then stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him and said: “Speak to me no
word of flight, for I ween that thou shalt not at all persuade me; not
in my blood is it to fight a skulking fight or cower down; my force is
steadfast still. I have no mind to mount the chariot, nay, even as I am
will I go to face them; Pallas Athene biddeth me not be afraid. And as
for these, their fleet horses shall not take both back from us again,
even if one or other escape. And this moreover tell I thee, and lay
thou it to heart: if Athene rich in counsel grant me this glory, to
slay them both, then refrain thou here these my fleet horses, and bind
the reins tight to the chariot rim; and be mindful to leap upon
Aineias’ horses, and drive them forth from the Trojans amid the
well-greaved Achaians. For they are of that breed whereof farseeing
Zeus gave to Tros recompense for Ganymede his child, because they were
the best of all horses beneath the daylight and the sun.”

In such wise talked they one to the other, and anon those other twain
came near, driving their fleet horses. First to him spake Lykaol’s
glorious son: “O thou strong-souled and cunning, son of proud Tydeus,
verily my swift dart vanquished thee not, the bitter arrow; so now will
I make trial with my spear if I can hit thee.”

He spake and poised and hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon
Tydeides’ shield; right through it sped the point of bronze and reached
the breastplate. So over him shouted loudly Lykaol’s glorious son:
“Thou art smitten on the belly right through, and I ween thou shalt not
long hold up thine head; so thou givest me great renown.”

But mighty Diomedes unaffrighted answered him: “Thou hast missed, and
not hit; but ye twain I deem shall not cease till one or other shall
have fallen and glutted with blood Ares the stubborn god of war.”

So spake he and hurled; and Athene guided the dart upon his nose beside
the eye, and it pierced through his white teeth. So the hard bronze cut
through his tongue at the root and the point issued forth by the base
of the chin. He fell from his chariot, and his splendid armour gleaming
clanged upon him, and the fleet-footed horses swerved aside; so there
his soul and strength were unstrung.

Then Aineias leapt down with shield and long spear, fearing lest
perchance the Achaians might take from him the corpse; and strode over
him like a lion confident in his strength, and held before him his
spear and the circle of his shield, eager to slay whoe’er should come
to face him, crying his terrible cry. Then Tydeides grasped in his hand
a stone—a mighty deed—such as two men, as men now are, would not avail
to lift; yet he with ease wielded it all alone. Therewith he smote
Aineias on the hip where the thigh turneth in the hip joint, and this
men call the “cup-bone.” So he crushed his cup-bone, and brake both
sinews withal, and the jagged stone tore apart the skin. Then the hero
stayed fallen upon his knees and with stout hand leant upon the earth;
and the darkness of night veiled his eyes. And now might Aineias king
of men have perished, but that Aphrodite daughter of Zeus was swift to
mark. About her dear son wound she her white arms, and spread before
his face a fold of her radiant vesture, to be a covering from the
darts, lest any of the fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into
his breast and take away his life.

So was she bearing her dear son away from battle; but the son of
Kapaneus forgat not the behest that Diomedes of the loud war-cry had
laid upon him; he refrained his own whole-hooved horses away from the
tumult, binding the reins tight to the chariot-rim, and leapt on the
sleek-coated horses of Aineias, and drave them from the Trojans to the
well-greaved Achaians, and gave them to Deipylos his dear comrade whom
he esteemed above all that were his age-fellows, because he was
like-minded with himself; and bade him drive them to the hollow ships.
Then did the hero mount his own chariot and take the shining reins and
forthwith drive his strong-hooved horses in quest of Tydeides, eagerly.
Now Tydeides had made onslaught with pitiless weapon on Kypris
[Aphrodite], knowing how she was a coward goddess and none of those
that have mastery in battle of the warriors. Now when he had pursued
her through the dense throng and come on her, then great-hearted
Tydeus’ son thrust with his keen spear, and leapt on her and wounded
the skin of her weak hand; straight through the ambrosial raiment that
the Graces themselves had woven her pierced the dart into the flesh,
above the springing of the palm. Then flowed the goddess’s immortal
blood, such ichor as floweth in the blessed gods; for they eat no bread
neither drink they gleaming wine, wherefore they are bloodless and are
named immortals. And she with a great cry let fall her son: him Phoebus
Apollo took into his arms and saved him in a dusky cloud, lest any of
the fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into his breast and take
away his life. But over her Diomedes of the loud war-cry shouted afar:
“Refrain thee, thou daughter of Zeus, from war and fighting. Is it not
enough that thou beguilest feeble women? But if in battle thou wilt
mingle, verily I deem that thou shalt shudder at the name of battle, if
thou hear it even afar off.”

So spake he, and she departed in amaze and was sore troubled: and
wind-footed Iris took her and led her from the throng tormented with
her pain, and her fair skin was stained. There found she impetuous Ares
sitting, on the battle’s left; and his spear rested upon a cloud, and
his fleet steeds. Then she fell on her knees and with instant prayer
besought of her dear brother his golden-frontleted steeds: “Dear
brother, save me and give me thy steeds, that I may win to Olympus,
where is the habitation of the immortals. Sorely am I afflicted with a
wound wherewith a mortal smote me, even Tydeides, who now would fight
even with father Zeus.”

So spake she, and Ares gave her his golden-frontleted steeds, and she
mounted on the chariot sore at heart. By her side mounted Iris, and in
her hands grasped the reins and lashed the horses to start them; and
they flew onward nothing loth. Thus soon they came to the habitation of
the gods, even steep Olympus. There wind-footed fleet Iris loosed the
horses from the chariot and stabled them, and set ambrosial forage
before them; but fair Aphrodite fell upon Dione’s knees that was her
mother. She took her daughter in her arms and stroked her with her
hand, and spake and called upon her name: “Who now of the sons of
heaven, dear child, hath entreated thee thus wantonly, as though thou
wert a wrong-doer in the face of all?”

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite made answer to her: “Tydeus’ son wounded
me, high-hearted Diomedes, because I was saving from the battle my dear
son Aineias, who to me is dearest far of all men. For no more is the
fierce battle-cry for Trojans and Achaians, but the Danaans now are
fighting even the immortals.”

Then the fair goddess Dione answered her: “Be of good heart, my child,
and endure for all thy pain; for many of us that inhabit the mansions
of Olympus have suffered through men, in bringing grievous woes one
upon another.”

So saying with both hands she wiped the ichor from the arm; her arm was
comforted, and the grievous pangs assuaged. But Athene and Hera beheld,
and with bitter words provoked Zeus the son, of Kronos. Of them was the
bright-eyed goddess Athene first to speak: “Father Zeus, wilt thou
indeed be wroth with me whate’er I say? Verily I ween that Kypris was
urging some woman of Achaia to join her unto the Trojans whom she so
marvellously loveth; and stroking such an one of the fair-robed women
of Achaia, she tore upon the golden brooch her delicate hand.”

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and called unto
him golden Aphrodite and said: “Not unto thee, my child, are given the
works of war; but follow thou after the loving tasks of wedlock, and to
all these things shall fleet Ares and Athene look.”

Now while they thus spake in converse one with the other, Diomedes of
the loud war-cry leapt upon Aineias, knowing full well that Apollo
himself had spread his arms over him; yet reverenced he not even the
great god, but still was eager to slay Aineias and strip from him his
glorious armour. So thrice he leapt on him, fain to slay him, and
thrice Apollo beat back his glittering shield. And when the fourth time
he sprang at him like a god, then Apollo the Far-darter spake to him
with terrible shout: “Think, Tydeides, and shrink, nor desire to match
thy spirit with gods; seeing there is no comparison of the race of
immortal gods and of men that walk upon the earth.”

So said he, and Tydeides shrank a short space backwards, to avoid the
wrath of Apollo the Far-darter. Then Apollo set Aineias away from the
throng in holy Pergamos where his temple stood. There Leto and Archer
Artemis healed him in the mighty sanctuary, and gave him glory; but
Apollo of the silver bow made a wraith like unto Aineias’ self, and in
such armour as his; and over the wraith Trojans and goodly Achaians
each hewed the others’ bucklers on their breasts, their round shields
and fluttering targes.

Then to impetuous Ares said Phoebus Apollo: “Ares, Ares, blood-stained
bane of mortals, thou stormer of walls, wilt thou not follow after this
man and withdraw him from the battle, this Tydeides, who now would
fight even with father Zeus? First in close fight he wounded Kypris in
her hand hard by the wrist, and then sprang he upon myself like unto a
god.”

So saying he sate himself upon the height of Pergamos, and baleful Ares
entered among the Trojan ranks and aroused them in the likeness of
fleet Akamas, captain of the Thracians. On the heaven-nurtured sons of
Priam he called saying: “O ye sons of Priam, the heaven-nurtured king,
how long will ye yet suffer your host to be slain of the Achaians?
Shall it be even until they fight about our well-builded gates? Low
lieth the warrior whom we esteemed like unto goodly Hector, even
Aineias son of Anchises great of heart. Go to now, let us save from the
tumult our valiant comrade.”

So saying he aroused the spirit and soul of every man. Thereat Sarpedon
sorely chode noble Hector: “Hector, where now is the spirit gone that
erst thou hadst? Thou saidst forsooth that without armies or allies
thou wouldest hold the city, alone with thy sisters’ husbands and thy
brothers; but now can I not see any of these neither perceive them, but
they are cowering like hounds about a lion; and we are fighting that
are but allies among you.”

So spake Sarpedon, and his word stung Hector to the heart, Forthwith he
leapt from his chariot in his armour to the earth, and brandishing two
keen spears went everywhere through the host, urging them to fight, and
roused the dread battle-cry. So they were rallied and stood to face the
Achaians: and the Argives withstood them in close array and fled not.
Even as a wind carrieth the chaff about the sacred threshing-floors
when men are winnowing, and the chaff-heaps grow white—so now grew the
Achaians white with falling dust which in their midst the horses’
hooves beat up into the brazen heaven, as fight was joined again, and
the charioteers wheeled round. Thus bare they forward the fury of their
hands: and impetuous Ares drew round them a veil of night to aid the
Trojans in the battle, ranging everywhere. And Apollo himself sent
forth Aineias from his rich sanctuary and put courage in the heart of
him, shepherd of the hosts. So Aineias took his place amid his
comrades, and they were glad to see him come among them alive and sound
and full of valiant spirit. Yet they questioned him not at all, for all
the toil forbade them that the god of the silver bow was stirring and
Ares bane of men and Strife raging insatiably.

And on the other side the two Aiantes and Odysseus and Diomedes stirred
the Danaans to fight; yet these of themselves feared neither the
Trojans’ violence nor assaults, but stood like mists that Kronos’ son
setteth in windless air on the mountain tops, at peace, while the might
of the north wind sleepeth and of all the violent winds that blow with
keen breath and scatter apart the shadowing clouds. Even so the Danaans
withstood the Trojans steadfastly and fled not. And Atreides ranged
through the throng exhorting instantly: “My friends, quit you like men
and take heart of courage, and shun dishonour in one another’s eyes
amid the stress of battle. Of men that shun dishonour more are saved
than slain, but for them that flee is neither glory found nor any
safety.”

So saying he darted swiftly with his javelin and smote a foremost
warrior, even great-hearted Aineias’ comrade Deikoon son of Pergasos,
whom the Trojans held in like honour with Priam’s sons, because he was
swift to do battle amid the foremost. Him lord Agamemnon smote with his
dart upon the shield, and it stayed not the spear, but the point passed
through, so that he drave it through the belt into his nethermost
belly: and he fell with a crash and his armour clanged upon him.

Then did Aineias slay two champions of the Danaans, even the sons of
Diokles, Krethon and Orsilochos. Like them, two lions on the mountain
tops are nurtured by their dam in the deep forest thickets; and these
harry the kine and goodly sheep and make havoc of the farmsteads of
men, till in their turn they too are slain at mel’s hands with the keen
bronze; in such wise were these twain vanquished at Aineias’ hands and
fell like tall pine-trees.

But Menelaos dear to Ares had pity of them in their fall, and strode
through the forefront, harnessed in flashing bronze, brandishing his
spear; and Ares stirred his courage, with intent that he might fall
beneath Aineias’ hand. But Antilochos, great-hearted Nestor’s son,
beheld him, and strode through the forefront; because he feared
exceedingly for the shepherd of the host, lest aught befall him and
disappoint them utterly of their labour. So those two were now holding
forth their hands and sharp spears each against the other, eager to do
battle; when Antilochos came and stood hard by the shepherd of the
host. But Aineias faced them not, keen warrior though he was, when he
beheld two men abiding side by side; so these haled away the corpses to
the Achaians’ host, and laid the hapless twain in their comrades’ arms,
and themselves turned back and fought on amid the foremost.

But Hector marked them across the ranks, and sprang on them with a
shout, and the battalions of the Trojans followed him in their might:
and Ares led them on and dread Enyo, she bringing ruthless turmoil of
war, the while Ares wielded in his hands his monstrous spear, and
ranged now before Hector’s face, and now behind.

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered to behold him; and even as
a shiftless man crossing a great plain cometh on a swift-streaming
river flowing on to the sea, and seeing it boil with foam springeth
backwards, even so now Tydeides shrank back and spake to the host:
“Friends, how marvel we that noble Hector is a spearman and bold man of
war! Yet ever is there beside him some god that wardeth off
destruction; even as now Ares is there by him in likeness of a mortal
man. But with faces towards the Trojans still give ground backwards,
neither be desirous to fight amain with gods.”

Now the Argives before the face of Ares and mail-clad Hector neither
turned them round about toward their black ships, nor charged forward
in battle, but still fell backward, when they heard of Ares amid the
Trojans. But when the white-armed goddess Hera marked them making havoc
of the Argives in the press of battle, anon she spake winged words to
Athene: “Out on it, thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied
maiden! Was it for naught we pledged our word to Menelaos, that he
should not depart till he had laid waste well-walled Ilios,—if thus we
let baleful Ares rage? Go to now, let us twain also take thought of
impetuous valour.”

So said she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not. So
Hera the goddess queen, daughter of Kronos, went her way to harness the
gold-frontleted steeds. And Athene, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,
cast down at her father’s threshold her woven vesture many-coloured,
that herself had wrought and her hands had fashioned, and put on her
the tunic of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, and arrayed her in her armour for
dolorous battle. About her shoulders cast she the tasselled aegis
terrible, whereon is Panic as a crown all round about, and Strife is
therein and Valour and horrible Onslaught withal, and therein is the
dreadful monster’s Gorgon head, dreadful and grim, portent of
aegis-bearing Zeus. Upon her head set she the two-crested golden helm
with fourfold plate, bedecked with men-at-arms of a hundred cities.
Upon the flaming chariot set she her foot, and grasped her heavy spear,
great and stout, wherewith she vanquisheth the ranks of men, even of
heroes with whom she of the awful sire is wroth. Then Hera swiftly
smote the horses with the lash; self-moving groaned upon their hinges
the gates of heaven whereof the Hours are warders, to whom is committed
great heaven and Olympus, whether to throw open the thick cloud or set
it to. There through the gates guided they their horses patient of the
lash. And they found the son of Kronos sitting apart from all the gods
on the topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus. Then the white-armed
goddess Hera stayed her horses and questioned the most high Zeus, the
son of Kronos, and said: “Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation with
Ares for these violent deeds? How great and goodly a company of
Achaians hath he destroyed recklessly and in unruly wise, unto my
sorrow. But here in peace Kypris and Apollo of the silver bow take
their pleasure, having set on this mad one that knoweth not any law.
Father Zeus, wilt thou at all be wroth with me if I smite Ares and
chase him from the battle in sorry plight?”

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said to her: “Go to now, set
upon him Athene driver of the spoil, who most is wont to bring sore
pain upon him.”

So spake he, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not, and
lashed her horses; they nothing loth flew on between earth and starry
heaven. As far as a man seeth with his eyes into the haze of distance
as he sitteth on a place of outlook and gazeth over the wine-dark sea,
so far leap the loudly neighing horses of the gods. Now when they came
to Troy and the two flowing rivers, even to where Simoeis and
Skamandros join their streams, there the white-armed goddess Hera
stayed her horses and loosed them from the car and poured thick mist
round about them, and Simoeis made ambrosia spring up for them to
graze. So the goddesses went their way with step like unto
turtle-doves, being fain to bring succour to the men of Argos. And when
they were now come where the most and most valiant stood, thronging
about mighty Diomedes tamer of horses, in the semblance of ravening
lions or wild boars whose strength is nowise feeble, then stood the
white-armed goddess Hera and shouted in the likeness of great-hearted
Stentor with voice of bronze, whose cry was loud as the cry of fifty
other men: “Fie upon you, Argives, base things of shame, so brave in
semblance! While yet noble Achilles entered continually into battle,
then issued not the Trojans even from the Dardanian gate; for they had
dread of his terrible spear. But now fight they far from the city at
the hollow ships.”

So saying she aroused the spirit and soul of every man. And to
Tydeides’ side sprang the bright-eyed goddess Athene. That lord she
found beside his horses and chariot, cooling the wound that Pandaros
with his dart had pierced, for his sweat vexed it by reason of the
broad baldrick of his round shield; therewith was he vexed and his arm
grew weary, so he was lifting up the baldrick and wiping away the dusky
blood. Then the goddess laid her hand on his horses’ yoke, and said:
“Of a truth Tydeus begat a son little after his own likeness. Tydeus
was short of stature, but a man of war.”

And stalwart Diomedes made answer to her and said: “I know thee,
goddess daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus: therefore with my whole heart
will I tell thee my thought and hide it not. Neither hath disheartening
terror taken hold upon me, nor any faintness, but I am still mindful of
thy behest that thou didst lay upon me. Thou forbadest me to fight face
to face with all the blessed gods, save only if Zeus’ daughter
Aphrodite should enter into battle, then to wound her with the keen
bronze. Therefore do I now give ground myself and have bidden all the
Argives likewise to gather here together; for I discern Ares lording it
in the fray.”

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene answered him: “Diomedes son of
Tydeus, thou joy of mine heart, fear thou, for that, neither Ares nor
any other of the immortals; so great a helper am I to thee. Go to now,
at Ares first guide thou thy whole-hooved horses, and smite him hand to
hand, nor have any awe of impetuous Ares, raving here, a curse
incarnate, the renegade that of late in converse with me and Hera
pledged him to fight against the Trojans and give succour to the
Argives, but now consorteth with the Trojans and hath forgotten these.”

So speaking, with her hand she drew back Sthenelos and thrust him from
the chariot to earth, and instantly leapt he down; so the goddess
mounted the car by noble Diomedes’ side right eagerly. The oaken axle
creaked loud with its burden, bearing the dread goddess and the man of
might. Then Athene grasped the whip and reins; forthwith against Ares
first guided she the whole-hooved horses. Now he was stripping huge
Periphas, most valiant far of the Aitolians, Ochesios’ glorious son.
Him was blood-stained Ares stripping; and Athene donned the helm of
Hades, that terrible Ares might not behold her. Now when Ares scourge
of mortals beheld noble Diomedes, he left huge Periphas lying there,
where at the first he had slain him and taken away his life, and made
straight at Diomedes tamer of horses. Now when they were come nigh in
onset on one another, first Ares thrust over the yoke and horse’s reins
with spear of bronze, eager to take away his life. But the bright-eyed
goddess Athene with her hand seized the spear and thrust it up over the
car, to spend itself in vain. Next Diomedes of the loud war-cry
attacked with spear of bronze; and Athene drave it home against Ares’
nethermost belly, where his taslets were girt about him. There smote he
him and wounded him, rending through his fair skin, and plucked forth
the spear again. Then brazen Ares bellowed loud as nine thousand
warriors or ten thousand cry in battle as they join in strife and fray.
Thereat trembling gat hold of Achaians and Trojans for fear, so
mightily bellowed Ares insatiate of battle.

Even as gloomy mist appeareth from the clouds when after beat a stormy
wind ariseth, even so to Tydeus’ son Diomedes brazen Ares appeared amid
clouds, faring to wide heaven. Swiftly came he to the gods’ dwelling,
steep Olympus, and sat beside Zeus son of Kronos with grief at heart,
and shewed the immortal blood flowing from the wound, and piteously
spake to him winged words: “Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation to
behold these violent deeds? For ever cruelly suffer we gods by one
another’s devices, in shewing men grace. With thee are we all at
variance, because thou didst beget that reckless maiden and baleful,
whose thought is ever of iniquitous deeds. For all the other gods that
are in Olympus hearken to thee, and we are subject every one; only her
thou chastenest not, neither in deed nor word, but settest her on,
because this pestilent one is thine own offspring. Now hath she urged
on Tydeus’ son, even overweening Diomedes, to rage furiously against
the immortal gods. Kypris first he wounded in close fight, in the wrist
of her hand, and then assailed he me, even me, with the might of a god.
Howbeit my swift feet bare me away; else had I long endured anguish
there amid the grisly heaps of dead, or else had lived strengthless
from the smitings of the spear.”

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer looked sternly at him and said: “Nay, thou
renegade, sit not by me and whine. Most hateful to me art thou of all
gods that dwell in Olympus: thou ever lovest strife and wars and
battles. Truly thy mother’s spirit is intolerable, unyielding, even
Hera’s; her can I scarce rule with words. Therefore I deem that by her
prompting thou art in this plight. Yet will I no longer endure to see
thee in anguish; mine offspring art thou, and to me thy mother bare
thee.”

So spake he and bade Paieon heal him. And Paieon laid assuaging drugs
upon the wound. Even as fig juice maketh haste to thicken white milk,
that is liquid but curdleth speedily as a man stirreth, even so swiftly
healed he impetuous Ares. And Hebe bathed him, and clothed him in
gracious raiment, and he sate him down by Zeus son of Kronos, glorying
in his might.

Then fared the twain back to the mansion of great Zeus, even Hera and

Athene, having stayed Ares scourge of mortals from his man-slaying.



BOOK VI.

How Diomedes and Glaukos, being about to fight, were known to each
other, and parted in friendliness. And how Hector returning to the city
bade farewell to Andromache his wife.


So was the dread fray of Trojans and Achaians left to itself, and the
battle swayed oft this way and that across the plain, as they aimed
against each other their bronze-shod javelins, between Simoeis and the
streams of Xanthos.

Now had the Trojans been chased again by the Achaians, dear to Ares, up
into Ilios, in their weakness overcome, but that Prism’s son Helenos,
far best of augurs, stood by Aineias’ side and Hector’s, and spake to
them: “Aineias and Hector, seeing that on you lieth the task of war in
chief of Trojans and Lykians, because for every issue ye are foremost
both for fight and counsel, stand ye your ground, and range the host
everywhither to rally them before the gates, ere yet they fall fleeing
in their womel’s arms, and be made a rejoicing to the foe. Then when ye
have aroused all our battalions we will abide here and fight the
Danaans, though in sore weariness; for necessity presseth us hard: but
thou, Hector, go into the city, and speak there to thy mother and mine;
let her gather the aged wives to bright-eyed Athene’s temple in the
upper city, and with her key open the doors of the holy house; and let
her lay the robe, that seemeth to her the most gracious and greatest in
her hall and far dearest unto herself, upon the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene; and vow to her to sacrifice in her temple
twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will have mercy
on the city and the Trojans’ wives and little children. So may she
perchance hold back Tydeus’ son from holy Ilios, the furious spearman,
the mighty deviser of rout, whom in good sooth I deem to have proved
himself mightiest of the Achaians. Never in this wise feared we
Achilles, prince of men, who they say is born of a goddess; nay, but he
that we see is beyond measure furious; none can match him for might.”

So spake he, and Hector disregarded not his brother’s word, but leapt
forthwith from his chariot in his armour to earth, and brandishing two
sharp spears passed everywhere through the host, rousing them to
battle, and stirred the dread war-cry. So they were rallied and stood
to face the Achaians, and the Argives gave ground and ceased from
slaughter, and deemed that some immortal had descended from starry
heaven to bring the Trojans succour, in such wise rallied they. Then
Hector called to the Trojans with far-reaching shout: “O high-souled
Trojans and ye far-famed allies, quit you like men, my friends, and
take thought of impetuous courage, while I depart to Ilios and bid the
elders of the council and our wives pray to the gods and vow them
hecatombs.”

So saying Hector of the glancing helm departed, and the black hide beat
on either side against his ankles and his neck, even the rim that ran
uttermost about his bossed shield.

Now Glaukos son of Hippolochos and Tydeus’ son met in the mid-space of
the foes, eager to do battle. Thus when the twain were come nigh in
onset on each other, to him first spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry:
“Who art thou, noble sir, of mortal men? For never have I beheld thee
in glorious battle ere this, yet now hast thou far outstripped all men
in thy hardihood, seeing thou abidest my far-shadowing spear. Luckless
are the fathers whose children face my might. But if thou art some
immortal come down from heaven, then will not I fight with heavenly
gods. But if thou art of men that eat the fruit of the field, come
nigh, that anon thou mayest enter the toils of destruction.”

Then Hippolochos’ glorious son made answer to him: “Great-hearted
Tydeides, why enquirest thou of my generation? Even as are the
generations of leaves such are those likewise of men; the leaves that
be the wind scattereth on the earth, and the forest buddeth and putteth
forth more again, when the season of spring is at hand; so of the
generations of men one putteth forth and another ceaseth. Yet if thou
wilt, have thine answer, that thou mayest well know our lineage,
whereof many men have knowledge. Hippolochos, son of Bellerophon, begat
me, and of him do I declare me to be sprung; he sent me to Troy and
bade me very instantly to be ever the best and to excel all other men,
nor put to shame the lineage of my fathers that were of noblest blood
in Ephyre and in wide Lykia. This is the lineage and blood whereof I
avow myself to be.”

So said he, and Diomedes of the loud war-cry was glad. He planted his
spear in the bounteous earth and with soft words spake to the shepherd
of the host: “Surely then thou art to me a guest-friend of old times
through my father: for goodly Oineus of yore entertained noble
Bellerophon in his halls and kept him twenty days. Moreover they gave
each the other goodly gifts of friendship; Oineus gave a belt bright
with purple, and Bellerophon a gold two-handled cup. Therefore now am I
to thee a dear guest-friend in midmost Argos, and thou in Lykia,
whene’er I fare to your land. So let us shun each other’s spears, even
amid the throng; Trojans are there in multitudes and famous allies for
me to slay, whoe’er it be that God vouchsafeth me and my feet overtake;
and for thee are there Achaians in multitude, to slay whome’er thou
canst. But let us make exchange of arms between us, that these also may
know how we avow ourselves to be guest-friends by lineage.”

So spake the twain, and leaping from their cars clasped each the other
by his hand, and pledged their faith. But now Zeus son of Kronos took
from Glaukos his wits, in that he made exchange with Diomedes Tydeus’
son of golden armour for bronze, the price of five score oxen for the
price of nine.

Now when Hector came to the Skaian gates and to the oak tree, there
came running round about him the Trojans’ wives and daughters,
enquiring of sons and brethren and friends and husbands. But he bade
them thereat all in turn pray to the gods; but sorrow hung over many.

But when he came to Priam’s beautiful palace, adorned with polished
colonnades—and in it were fifty chambers of polished stone, builded
hard by one another, wherein Priam’s sons slept beside their wedded
wives; and for his daughters over against them on the other side within
the courtyard were twelve roofed chambers of polished stone builded
hard by one another, wherein slept Priam’s sons-in-law beside their
chaste wives—then came there to meet him his bountiful mother, leading
with her Laodike, fairest of her daughters to look on; and she clasped
her hand in his, and spake, and called upon his name: “My son, why hast
thou left violent battle to come hither. Surely the sons of the
Achaians—name of evil!—press thee hard in fight about thy city, and so
thy spirit hath brought thee hither, to come and stretch forth thy
hands to Zeus from the citadel. But tarry till I bring thee honey-sweet
wine, that thou mayest pour libation to Zeus and all the immortals
first, and then shalt thou thyself also be refreshed if thou wilt
drink. When a man is awearied wine greatly maketh his strength to wax,
even as thou art awearied in fighting for thy fellows.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: “Bring me no
honey-hearted wine, my lady mother, lest thou cripple me of my courage
and I be forgetful of my might. But go thou to the temple of Athene,
driver of the spoil, with offerings, and gather the aged wives
together; and the robe that seemeth to thee the most gracious and
greatest in thy palace, and dearest unto thyself, that lay thou upon
the knees of beauteous-haired Athene, and vow to her to sacrifice in
her temple twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will
have mercy on the city and the Trojans’ wives and little children. So
go thou to the temple of Athene, driver of the spoil; and I will go
after Paris, to summon him, if perchance he will hearken to my voice.
Would that the earth forthwith might swallow him up! The Olympian
fostered him to be a sore bane to the Trojans and to great-hearted
Priam, and to Priam’s sons. If I but saw him going down to the gates of
death, then might I deem that my heart had forgotten its sorrows.”

So said he, and she went unto the hall, and called to her handmaidens,
and they gathered the aged wives throughout the city. Then she herself
went down to her fragrant chamber where were her embroidered robes, the
work of Sidonian women, whom godlike Alexandros himself brought from
Sidon, when he sailed over the wide sea, that journey wherein he
brought home high-born Helen. Of these Hekabe took one to bear for an
offering to Athene, the one that was fairest for adornment and
greatest, and shone like a star, and lay nethermost of all. Then went
she her way and the multitude of aged wives hasted after her. And
Hector was come to Alexandros’ fair palace, that himself had builded
with them that were most excellent carpenters then in deep-soiled
Troy-land; these made him his chamber and hall and courtyard hard by to
Priam and Hector, in the upper city. There entered in Hector dear to
Zeus, and his hand bare his spear, eleven cubits long: before his face
glittered the bronze spear-point, and a ring of gold ran round about
it. And he found Paris in his chamber busied with his beauteous arms,
his shield and breastplate, and handling his curved bow; and Helen of
Argos sate among her serving-women and appointed brave handiwork for
her handmaidens. Then when Hector saw him he rebuked him with scornful
words: “Good sir, thou dost not well to cherish this rancour in thy
heart. The folk are perishing about the city and high wall in battle,
and for thy sake the battle-cry is kindled and war around this city;
yes thyself wouldest thou fall out with another, didst thou see him
shrinking from hateful war. Up then, lest the city soon be scorched
with burning fire.”

And godlike Alexandros answered him: “Hector, since in measure thou
chidest me and not beyond measure, therefore will I tell thee; lay thou
it to thine heart and hearken to me. Not by reason so much of the
Trojans, for wrath and indignation, sate I me in my chamber, but fain
would I yield me to my sorrow. Even now my wife hath persuaded me with
soft words, and urged me into battle; and I moreover, even I, deem that
it will be better so; for victory shifteth from man to man. Go to then,
tarry awhile, let me put on my armour of war; or else fare thou forth,
and I will follow; and I think to overtake thee.”

So said he, but Hector of the glancing helm answered him not a word.
But Helen spake to him with gentle words: “My brother, even mine that
am a dog, mischievous and abominable, would that on the day when my
mother bare me at the first, an evil storm-wind had caught me away to a
mountain or a billow of the loud-sounding sea, where the billow might
have swept me away before all these things came to pass. Howbeit,
seeing the gods devised all these ills in this wise, would that then I
had been mated with a better man, that felt dishonour and the multitude
of mel’s reproachings. But as for him, neither hath he now sound heart,
nor ever will have; thereof deem I moreover that he will reap the
fruit. But now come, enter in and sit thee here upon this bench, my
brother, since thy heart chiefly trouble hath encompassed, for the sake
of me, that am a dog, and for Alexandros’ sin; on whom Zeus bringeth
evil doom, that even in days to come we may be a song in the ears of
men that shall be hereafter.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: “Bid me not sit,
Helen, of thy love; thou wilt not persuade me. Already my heart is set
to succour the men of Troy, that have great desire for me that am not
with them. But rouse thou this fellow, yea let himself make speed, to
overtake me yet within the city. For I shall go into mine house to
behold my housefolk and my dear wife, and infant boy; for I know not if
I shall return home to them again, or if the gods will now overthrow me
at the hands of the Achaians.”

So spake Hector of the glancing helm and departed; and anon he came to
his well-stablished house. But he found not white-armed Andromache in
the halls; she with her boy and fair-robed handmaiden had taken her
stand upon the tower, weeping and wailing. And when Hector found not
his noble wife within, he came and stood upon the threshold and spake
amid the serving women: “Come tell me now true, my serving women.
Whither went white-armed Andromache forth from the hall? Hath she gone
out to my sisters or unto my brothers’ fair-robed wives, or to Athene’s
temple, where all the fair-tressed Trojan women propitiate the awful
goddess?”

Then a busy housedame spake in answer to him: “Hector, seeing thou
straitly chargest us tell thee true, neither hath she gone out to any
of thy sisters or thy brothers’ fair-robed wives, neither to Athene’s
temple, where all the fair-tressed Trojan women are propitiating the
awful goddess; but she went to the great tower of Ilios, because she
heard the Trojans were hard pressed, and great victory was for the
Achaians. So hath she come in haste to the wall, like unto one
frenzied; and the nurse with her beareth the child.”

So spake the housedame, and Hector hastened from his house back by the
same way down the well-builded streets. When he had passed through the
great city and was come to the Skaian gates, whereby he was minded to
issue upon the plain, then came his dear-won wife, running to meet him,
even Andromache daughter of great-hearted Eetion. So she met him now,
and with her went the handmaid bearing in her bosom the tender boy, the
little child, Hector’s loved son, like unto a beautiful star. Him
Hector called Skamandrios, but all the folk Astyanax [Astyanax = “City
King.”]; for only Hector guarded Ilios. So now he smiled and gazed at
his boy silently, and Andromache stood by his side weeping, and clasped
her hand in his, and spake and called upon his name. “Dear my lord,
this thy hardihood will undo thee, neither hast thou any pity for thine
infant boy, nor for me forlorn that soon shall be thy widow; for soon
will the Achaians all set upon thee and slay thee. But it were better
for me to go down to the grave if I lose thee; for never more will any
comfort be mine, when once thou, even thou, hast met thy fate, but only
sorrow. Nay, Hector, thou art to me father and lady mother, yea and
brother, even as thou art my goodly husband. Come now, have pity and
abide here upon the tower, lest thou make thy child an orphan and thy
wife a widow.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: “Surely I take
thought for all these things, my wife; but I have very sore shame of
the Trojans and Trojan dames with trailing robes, if like a coward I
shrink away from battle. Moreover mine own soul forbiddeth me, seeing I
have learnt ever to be valiant and fight in the forefront of the
Trojans, winning my father’s great glory and mine own. Yea of a surety
I know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy Ilios to be
laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear. Yet
doth the anguish of the Trojans hereafter not so much trouble me,
neither Hekabe’s own, neither king Priam’s, neither my brethrel’s, the
many and brave that shall fall in the dust before their foemen, as doth
thine anguish in the day when some mail-clad Achaian shall lead thee
weeping and rob thee of the light of freedom. So shalt thou abide in
Argos and ply the loom at another womal’s bidding, and bear water from
fount Messeis or Hypereia, being grievously entreated, and sore
constraint shall be laid upon thee. And then shall one say that
beholdeth thee weep: ‘This is the wife of Hector, that was foremost in
battle of the horse-taming Trojans when men fought about Ilios.’ Thus
shall one say hereafter, and fresh grief will be thine for lack of such
an husband as thou hadst to ward off the day of thraldom. But me in
death may the heaped-up earth be covering, ere I hear thy crying and
thy carrying into captivity.”

So spake glorious Hector, and stretched out his arm to his boy. But the
child shrunk crying to the bosom of his fair-girdled nurse, dismayed at
his dear father’s aspect, and in dread at the bronze and horse-hair
crest that he beheld nodding fiercely from the helmet’s top. Then his
dear father laughed aloud, and his lady mother; forthwith glorious
Hector took the helmet from his head, and laid it, all gleaming, upon
the earth; then kissed he his dear son and dandled him in his arms, and
spake in prayer to Zeus and all the gods, “O Zeus and all ye gods,
vouchsafe ye that this my son may likewise prove even as I, pre-eminent
amid the Trojans, and as valiant in might, and be a great king of
Ilios. Then may men say of him, ‘Far greater is he than his father’ as
he returneth home from battle; and may he bring with him blood-stained
spoils from the foeman he hath slain, and may his mother’s heart be
glad.”

So spake he, and laid his son in his dear wife’s arms; and she took him
to her fragrant bosom, smiling tearfully. And her husband had pity to
see her, and caressed her with his hand, and spake and called upon her
name: “Dear one, I pray thee be not of oversorrowful heart; no man
against my fate shall hurl me to Hades; only destiny, I ween, no man
hath escaped, be he coward or be he valiant, when once he hath been
born. But go thou to thine house and see to thine own tasks, the loom
and distaff, and bid thine handmaidens ply their work; but for war
shall men provide, and I in chief of all men that dwell in Ilios.”

So spake glorious Hector, and took up his horse-hair crested helmet;
and his dear wife departed to her home, oft looking back, and letting
fall big tears. Anon she came to the well-stablished house of
man-slaying Hector, and found therein her many handmaidens, and stirred
lamentation in them all. So bewailed they Hector, while yet he lived,
within his house: for they deemed that he would no more come back to
them from battle, nor escape the fury of the hands of the Achaians.

Neither lingered Paris long in his lofty house, but clothed on him his
brave armour, bedight with bronze, and hasted through the city,
trusting to his nimble feet. Even as when a stalled horse, full-fed at
the manger, breaketh his tether and speedeth at the gallop across the
plain, being wont to bathe him in the fair-flowing stream, exultingly;
and holdeth his head on high, and his mane floateth about his
shoulders, and he trusteth in his glory, and nimbly his limbs bear him
to the haunts and pasturages of mares; even so Priam’s son Paris,
glittering in his armour like the shining sun, strode down from high
Pergamos laughingly, and his swift feet bare him. Forthwith he overtook
his brother noble Hector, even as he was on the point to turn him away
from the spot where he had dallied with his wife. To him first spake
godlike Alexandros: “Sir, in good sooth I have delayed thee in thine
haste by my tarrying, and came not rightly as thou badest me.”

And Hector of the glancing helm answered him and said: “Good brother,
no man that is rightminded could make light of thy doings in fight,
seeing thou art strong: but thou art wilfully remiss and hast no care;
and for this my heart is grieved within me, that I hear shameful words
concerning thee in the Trojans’ mouths, who for thy sake endure much
toil. But let us be going; all this will we make good hereafter, if
Zeus ever vouchsafe us to set before the heavenly gods that are for
everlasting the cup of deliverance in our halls, when we have chased
out of Troy-land the well-greaved Achaians.”



BOOK VII.

Of the single combat between Aias and Hector, and of the burying of the
dead, and the building of a wall about the Achaian ships.


So spake glorious Hector and issued from the gates, and with him went
his brother Alexandros; and both were eager of soul for fight and
battle. Even as God giveth to longing seamen fair wind when they have
grown weary of beating the main with polished oars, and their limbs are
fordone with toil, even so appeared these to the longing Trojans.

Now when the goddess bright-eyed Athene marked them making havoc of the
Argives in the press of battle, she darted down from the crests of
Olympus to holy Ilios. But Apollo rose to meet her, for he beheld her
from Pergamos, and would have victory for the Trojans. So the twain met
each the other by the oak-tree. To her spake first king Apollo son of
Zeus: “Why now art thou come thus eagerly from Olympus, thou daughter
of great Zeus, and why hath thy high heart sent thee? Surely it is to
give the Danaans unequal victory in battle! seeing thou hast no mercy
on the Trojans, that perish. But if thou wouldest hearken to me—and it
were far better so—let us now stay battle and warring for the day;
hereafter shall they fight again, till they reach the goal of Ilios,
since thus it seemeth good to your hearts, goddesses immortal, to lay
waste this city.”

And the goddess bright-eyed Athene made answer to him: “So be it,

Far-darter; in this mind I likewise came from Olympus to the midst of

Trojans and Achaians. But come, how thinkest thou to stay the battle of

the warriors?”

And king Apollo, son of Zeus, made answer to her: “Let us arouse the
stalwart spirit of horse-taming Hector, if so be he will challenge some
one of the Danaans in single fight man to man to meet him in deadly
combat. So shall the bronze-greaved Achaians be jealous and stir up one
to fight singly with goodly Hector.” So spake he and the bright-eyed
goddess Athene disregarded not. Now Helenos Priam’s dear son understood
in spirit their resolve that the gods in counsel had approved; and he
went to Hector and stood beside him, and spake a word to him: “Hector
son of Priam, peer of Zeus in counsel, wouldest thou now hearken at all
to me? for I am thy brother. Make the other Trojans sit, and all the
Achaians, and thyself challenge him that is best of the Achaians to
meet thee man to man in deadly combat. It is not yet thy destiny to die
and meet thy doom; for thus heard I the voice of the gods that are from
everlasting.” So said he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his
saying, and went into the midst and refrained the battalions of the
Trojans with his spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them
down: and Agamemnon made the well-greaved Achaians sit. And Athene
withal and Apollo of the silver bow, in the likeness of vulture birds,
sate them upon a tall oak holy to aegis-bearing father Zeus, rejoicing
in their warriors; and the ranks of all of them sate close together,
bristling with shields and plumes and spears. Even as there spreadeth
across the main the ripple of the west wind newly risen, and the sea
grows black beneath it, so sate the ranks of Achaians and Trojans upon
the plain. And Hector spake between both hosts: “Hearken to me, Trojans
and well-greaved Achaians, that I may speak what my mind within my
breast biddeth me. Our oaths of truce Kronos’ son, enthroned on high,
accomplished not; but evil is his intent and ordinance for both our
hosts, until either ye take fair-towered Troy or yourselves be
vanquished beside your seafaring ships. But in the midst of you are the
chiefest of all the Achaians; therefore now let the man whose heart
biddeth him fight with me come hither from among you all to be your
champion against goodly Hector. And this declare I, and be Zeus our
witness thereto; if that man slay me with the long-edged sword, let him
spoil me of my armour and bear it to the hollow ships, but give back my
body to my home, that Trojans and Trojans’ wives may give me my due of
burning in my death. But if I slay him and Apollo vouchsafe me glory, I
will spoil him of his armour and bear it to holy Ilios and hang it upon
the temple of far-darting Apollo, but his corpse will I render back to
the well-decked ships, that the flowing-haired Achaians may entomb him,
and build him a barrow beside wide Hellespont. So shall one say even of
men that be late born, as he saileth in his benched ship over the
wine-dark sea: ‘This is the barrow of a man that died in days of old, a
champion whom glorious Hector slew.’ So shall a man say hereafter, and
this my glory shall never die.”

So spake he and they all were silent and held their peace; to deny him
they were ashamed, and feared to meet him. But at the last stood up
Menelaos and spake amid them and chiding upbraided them, and groaned
deep at heart: “Ah me, vain threateners, ye women of Achaia and no more
men, surely all this shall be a shame, evil of evil, if no one of the
Danaans now goeth to meet Hector. Nay, turn ye all to earth and water,
sitting there each man disheartened, helplessly inglorious; against him
will I myself array me; and from on high the threads of victory are
guided of the immortal gods.”

So spake he and donned his fair armour. And now, O Menelaos, had the
end of life appeared for thee at Hector’s hands, seeing he was stronger
far, but that the princes of the Achaians started up and caught thee.
And Atreus’ son himself, wide-ruling Agamemnon, took him by his right
hand and spake a word and called upon his name: “Thou doest madly,
Menelaos fosterling of Zeus; yet is it no time for this thy madness.
Draw back, though it be with pain, nor think for contentiol’s sake to
fight with one better than thou, with Hector Priam’s son, whom others
beside thee abhor. Yea, this man even Achilles dreadeth to meet in
battle, wherein is the warrior’s glory; and Achilles is better far than
thou. Go therefore now and sit amid the company of thy fellows; against
him shall the Achaians put forth another champion. Fearless though he
be and insatiate of turmoil, I ween that he shall be fain to rest his
knees, if he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray.”

So spake the hero and persuaded his brother’s heart with just counsel;
and he obeyed. So his squires thereat with gladness took his armour
from his shoulders; and Nestor stood up and spake amid the Argives:
“Fie upon it, verily sore lamentation cometh on the land of Achaia.
Verily old Peleus driver of chariots would groan sore, that goodly
counsellor of the Myrmidons and orator, who erst questioned me in his
house, and rejoiced greatly, inquiring of the lineage and birth of all
the Argives. If he heard now of those that all were cowering before
Hector, then would he lift his hands to the immortals, instantly
praying that his soul might depart from his limbs down to the house of
Hades. Would to God I were thus young and my strength were sound; then
would Hector of the glancing helm soon find his combat. But of those of
you that be chieftains of the host of the Achaians, yet desireth no man
of good heart to meet Hector face to face.” So the old man upbraided
them, and there stood up nine in all. Far first arose Agamemnon king of
men, and after him rose Tydeus’ son stalwart Diomedes, and after them
the Aiantes clothed with impetuous might, and after them Idomeneus and
Idomeneus’ brother-in-arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios slayer of men,
and after them Eurypylos Euaimol’s glorious son; and up rose Thoas
Andraimol’s son and goodly Odysseus. So all these were fain to fight
with goodly Hector. And among them spake again knightly Nestor of
Gerenia: “Now cast ye the lot from the first unto the last, for him
that shall be chosen: for he shall in truth profit the well-greaved
Achaians, yea and he shall have profit of his own soul, if he escape
from the fury of war and terrible fray.”

So said he, and they marked each man his lot and cast them in the
helmet of Agamemnon Atreus’ son; and the hosts prayed and lifted up
their hands to the gods. And thus would one say, looking up to wide
heaven: “O father Zeus, vouchsafe that the lot fall upon Aias or
Tydeus’ son, or else on the king of Mykene rich in gold.”

So spake they, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia shook the helmet, and
there leapt forth the lot that themselves desired, even the lot of
Aias. And Aias saw and knew the token upon the lot, and rejoiced in
heart, and spake: “My friends, verily the lot is mine, yea and myself
am glad at heart, because I deem that I shall vanquish goodly Hector.
But come now, while I clothe me in my armour of battle, pray ye the
while to Kronos’ son king Zeus, in silence to yourselves, that the
Trojans hear you not—nay rather, openly if ye will, for we have no fear
of any man soever. For none by force shall chase me, he willing me
unwilling, neither by skill; seeing I hope that not so skill-less,
either, was I born in Salamis nor nurtured.”

So said he, and they prayed to Kronos’ son, king Zeus; and thus would
one speak, looking up to wide heaven: “O father Zeus that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great, vouchsafe to Aias victory and the
winning of great glory. But if thou so lovest Hector indeed, and carest
for him, grant unto either equal prowess and renown.”

So said they, while Aias arrayed him in flashing bronze. And when he
had now clothed upon his flesh all his armour, then marched he as huge
Ares coming forth, when he goeth to battle amid heroes whom Kronos’ son
setteth to fight in fury of heart-consuming strife. So rose up huge
Aias, bulwark of the Achaians, with a smile on his grim face: and went
with long strides of his feet beneath him, shaking his far-shadowing
spear. Then moreover the Argives rejoiced to look upon him, but sore
trembling came upon the Trojans, on the limbs of every man, and
Hector’s own heart beat within his breast. But in no wise could he now
flee nor shrink back into the throng of the host, seeing he had
challenged him to battle. And Aias came near bearing his tower-like
shield of bronze, with sevenfold ox-hide, and stood near to Hector, and
spake to him threatening: “Hector, now verily shalt thou well know, man
to man, what manner of princes the Danaans likewise have among them,
even after Achilles, render of men, the lion-hearted. But he amid his
beaked seafaring ships lieth in sore wrath with Agamemnon shepherd of
the host; yet are we such as to face thee, yea and many of us. But make
thou beginning of war and battle.”

And great Hector of the glancing helm answered him: “Aias of the seed
of Zeus, son of Telamon, chieftain of the host, tempt not thou me like
some puny boy or woman that knoweth not deeds of battle. But I well
know wars and slaughterings. To right know I, to left know I the
wielding of my tough targe; therein I deem is stalwart soldiership. And
I know how to charge into the mellay of fleet chariots, and how in
close battle to join in furious Ares’ dance. Howbeit, I have no mind to
smite thee, being such an one as thou art, by spying thee unawares; but
rather openly, if perchance I may hit thee.”

He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled and smote
Aias’ dread shield of sevenfold hide upon the uttermost bronze, the
eighth layer that was thereon. Through six folds went the stubborn
bronze cleaving, but in the seventh hide it stayed. Then heaven-sprung
Aias hurled next his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the circle of
the shield of Priam’s son. Through the bright shield passed the violent
spear, and through the curiously wrought corslet pressed it on; and
straight forth beside the flank the spear rent his doublet; but he
swerved aside and escaped black death. Then both together with their
hands plucked forth their long spears and fell to like ravening lions
or wild boars whose might is nowise feeble. Then Priam’s son smote the
shield’s midst with his dart, but the bronze brake not through, for the
point turned back; but Aias leapt on him and pierced his buckler, and
straight through went the spear and staggered him in his onset, and
cleft its way unto his neck, so that the dark blood gushed up. Yet even
then did not Hector of the glancing helm cease from fight, but yielded
ground and with stout hand seized a stone lying upon the plain, black
and rugged and great; therewith hurled he and smote Aias’ dread shield
of sevenfold ox-hide in the midst upon the boss, and the bronze
resounded. Next Aias lifted a far greater stone, and swung and hurled
it, putting might immeasurable therein. So smote he the buckler and
burst it inwards with the rock like unto a millstone, and beat down his
knees; and he was stretched upon his back, pressed into his shield; but
Apollo straightway raised him up. And now had they been smiting hand to
hand with swords, but that the heralds, messengers of gods and men,
came, one from the Trojans, one from the mail-clad Achaians, even
Talthybios and Idaios, both men discreet. Between the two held they
their staves, and herald Idaios spake a word, being skilled in wise
counsel: “Fight ye no more, dear sons, neither do battle; seeing Zeus
the cloud-gatherer loveth you both, and both are men of war; that
verily know we all. But night already is upon us: it is well withal to
obey the hest [behest] of night.”

Then Telamonian Aias answered and said to him: “Idaios, bid ye Hector
to speak those words; of his own self he challenged to combat all our
best. Let him be first, and I will surely follow as he saith.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm said to him: “Aias, seeing God
gave thee stature and might and wisdom, and with the spear thou art
excellent above all the Achaians, let us now cease from combat and
battle for the day; but hereafter will we fight until God judge between
as, giving to one of us the victory: But come, let us give each the
other famous gifts, that men may thus say, Achaians alike and Trojans:
‘These, having fought for sake of heart-consuming strife, parted again
reconciled in friendship.’”

So said he, and gave him his silver-studded sword, with scabbard and
well-cut baldrick; and Aias gave his belt bright with purple. So they
parted, and one went to the Achaian host, and one betook him to the
throng of Trojans. And these rejoiced to behold him come to them alive
and sound, escaped from the fury of Aias and his hands unapproachable;
and they brought him to the city saved beyond their hope. And Aias on
their side the well-greaved Achaians brought to noble Agamemnon,
exulting in his victory.

So when these were come unto the huts of Atreides, then did Agamemnon
king of men slay them an ox, a male of five years old, for the most
mighty son of Kronos. This they flayed and made ready, and divided it
all, and minced it cunningly, and pierced it through with spits, and
roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. Then as soon as they had
rest from the task and had made ready the meal, they began the feast,
nor was their soul aught stinted of the equal banquet. And the hero son
of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, gave to Aias slices of the chine’s
full length for his honour. And when they had put from them the desire
of meat and drink, then first the old man began to weave the web of
counsel, even Nestor whose rede [counsel] of old time was proved most
excellent. He made harangue among them and said: “Son of Atreus and ye
other princes of the Achaians, seeing that many flowing-haired Achaians
are dead, and keen Ares hath spilt their dusky blood about fair-flowing
Skamandros, and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades;
therefore it behoveth thee to make the battle of the Achaians cease
with daybreak; and we will assemble to wheel hither the corpses with
oxen and mules; so let us burn them; and let us heap one barrow about
the pyre, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and thereto build
with speed high towers, a bulwark for our ships and for ourselves. In
the midst thereof let us make gates well compact, that through them may
be a way for chariot-driving. And without let us dig a deep foss hard
by, to be about it and to hinder horses and footmen, lest the battle of
the lordly Trojans be heavy on us hereafter.”

So spake he and all the chiefs gave assent. But meanwhile there was in
the high town of Ilios an assembly of the Trojans, fierce, confused,
beside Priam’s gate. To them discreet Antenor began to make harangue:
“Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may tell you
that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Lo, go to now, let us give
Helen of Argos and the wealth with her for the sons of Atreus to take
away. Now fight we in guilt against the oaths of faith; therefore is
there no profit for us that I hope to see fulfilled, unless we do
thus.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them noble
Alexandros, lord of Helen beautiful-haired; he made him answer and
spake winged words: “Antenor, these words from thee are no longer to my
pleasure; yet thou hast it in thee to devise other sayings more
excellent than this. But if indeed thou sayest this in earnest, then
verily the gods themselves have destroyed thy wit. But I will speak
forth amid the horse-taming Trojans, and declare outright; my wife will
I not give back; but the wealth I brought from Argos to our home, all
that I have a mind to give, and add more of mine own substance.”

So spake he and sate him down, and there stood up among them Priam of
the seed of Dardanos, the peer of gods in counsel; he made harangue to
them, and said: “Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that
I may tell you that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Now eat
your supper throughout the city as of old, and take thought to keep
watch, and be wakeful every man. And at dawn let Idaios fare to the
hollow ships to tell to Atreus’ sons Agamemnon and Menelaos the saying
of Alexandros, for whose sake strife is come about: and likewise to ask
them this wise word, whether they are minded to refrain from noisy war
till we have burned our dead; afterwards will we fight again, till
heaven part us and give one or other victory.”

So spake he, and they hearkened diligently to him and obeyed: and at
dawn Idaios fared to the hollow ships. He found the Danaans in
assembly, the men of Ares’ company, beside the stern of Agamemnol’s
ship; and so the loud-voiced herald stood in their midst and said unto
them: “Atreides and ye other princes of the Achaians, Priam and all the
noble Trojans bade me tell you-if perchance it might find favour and
acceptance with you-the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife
hath come about. The wealth that Alexandros brought in his hollow ships
to Troy-would he had perished first!-all that he hath a mind to give,
and to add more thereto of his substance. But the wedded wife of
glorious Menelaos he saith he will not give; yet verily the Trojans bid
him do it. Moreover they bade me ask this thing of you; whether ye are
minded to refrain from noisy war until we have burned our dead;
afterwards will we fight again, till heaven part us and give one or
other victory.”

So said he and they all kept silence and were still. But at the last
spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry in their midst: “Let no man now
accept Alexandros’ substance, neither Helel’s self; known is it, even
to him that hath no wit at all, how that the issues of destruction hang
already over the Trojans.”

So spake he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted, applauding the
saying of horse-taming Diomedes. And then lord Agamemnon spake to
Idaios: “Idaios, thyself thou hearest the saying of the Achaians, how
they answer thee; and the like seemeth good to me. But as concerning
the dead, I grudge you not to burn them; for dead corpses is there no
stinting; when they once are dead, of the swift propitiation of fire.
And for the oaths let Zeus be witness, the loud-thundering lord of
Hera.”

So saying he lifted up his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
Idaios departed back to holy Ilios. Now Trojans and Dardanians sate in
assembly, gathered all together to wait till Idaios should come; and he
came and stood in their midst and declared his message. Then they made
them ready very swiftly for either task, some to bring the dead, and
some to seek for wood. And on their part the Argives hasted from their
well-decked ships, some to bring the dead and some to seek for wood.

Now the sun was newly beating on the fields as he climbed heaven from
the deep stream of gently-flowing Ocean, when both sides met together.
Then was it a hard matter to know each man again; but they washed them
with water clean of clotted gore, and with shedding of hot tears lifted
them upon the wains. But great Priam bade them not wail aloud; so in
silence heaped they the corpses on the pyre, stricken at heart; and
when they had burned them with fire departed to holy Ilios. And in like
manner on their side the well-greaved Achaians heaped the corpses on
the pyre, stricken at heart, and when they had burned them with fire
departed to the hollow ships.

And when day was not yet, but still twilight of night, then was the
chosen folk of the Achaians gathered together around the pyre, and made
one barrow about it, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and
thereto built they a wall and lofty towers, a bulwark for their ships
and for themselves. In the midst thereof made they gates
well-compacted, that through them might be a way for chariot-driving.
And without they dug a deep foss beside it, broad and great, and
planted a palisade therein.

Thus toiled the flowing-haired Achaians: and the gods sate by Zeus, the
lord of lightning, and marvelled at the great work of the mail-clad
Achaians. And Poseidon shaker of earth spake first to them: “O father
Zeus, is there any man throughout the boundless earth that will any
more declare to the immortals his mind and counsel? Seest thou not how
the flowing-haired Achaians have now again built them a wall before
their ships, and drawn a foss around it, but gave not excellent
hecatombs to the gods? Verily the fame thereof shall reach as far as
the dawn spreadeth, and men will forget the wall that I and Phoebus
Apollo built with travail for the hero Laomedon.”

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer said to him, sore troubled: “Out on it,
far-swaying Shaker of earth, for this thing thou sayest. Well might
some other god fear this device, one that were far feebler than thou in
the might of his hands: but thine shall be the fame as far as the dawn
spreadeth. Go to now, hereafter when the flowing-haired Achaians be
departed upon their ships to their dear native land, then burst thou
this wall asunder and scatter it all into the sea, and cover the great
sea-beach over with sand again, that the great wall of the Achaians be
brought to naught.”



BOOK VIII.

How Zeus bethought him of his promise to avenge Achilles’ wrong on
Agamemnon; and therefore bade the gods refrain from war, and gave
victory to the Trojans.


Now Dawn the saffron-robed was spreading over all the earth, and Zeus
whose joy is in the thunder let call an assembly of the gods upon the
topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus, and himself made harangue to them
and all the gods gave ear: “Hearken to me, all gods and all ye
goddesses, that I may tell you what my heart within my breast
commandeth me. One thing let none essay, be it goddess or be it god, to
wit, to thwart my saying; approve ye it all together, that with all
speed I may accomplish these things. Whomsoever I shall perceive minded
to go, apart from the gods, to succour Trojans or Danaans, chastened in
no seemly wise shall he return to Olympus, or I will take and cast him
into misty Tartaros, right far away, where is the deepest gulf beneath
the earth; there are the gate of iron and threshold of bronze, as far
beneath Hades as heaven is high above the earth: then shall he know how
far I am mightiest of all gods. Go to now, ye gods, make trial that ye
all may know. Fasten ye a rope of gold from heaven, and all ye gods lay
hold thereof and all goddesses; yet could ye not drag from heaven to
earth Zeus, counsellor supreme, not though ye toiled sore. But once I
likewise were minded to draw with all my heart, then should I draw you
up with very earth and sea withal. Thereafter would I bind the rope
about a pinnacle of Olympus, and so should all those things be hung in
air. By so much am I beyond gods and beyond men.”

So saying he let harness to his chariot his bronze-shod horses, fleet
of foot, with flowing manes of gold; and himself clad him with gold
upon his flesh, and grasped the whip of gold, well wrought, and mounted
upon his car, and lashed the horses to start them; they nothing loth
sped on between earth and starry heaven. So fared he to many-fountained
Ida, mother of wild beasts, even unto Gargaros, where is his demesne
and fragrant altar. There did the father of men and gods stay his
horses, and unloose them from the car, and cast thick mist about them;
and himself sate on the mountain-tops rejoicing in his glory, to behold
the city of the Trojans and ships of the Achaians.

Now the flowing-haired Achaians took meat hastily among the huts and
thereafter arrayed themselves. Likewise the Trojans on their side armed
them throughout the town—a smaller host, yet for all that were they
eager to fight in battle, of forceful need, for their childrel’s sake
and their wives’. And the gates were opened wide and the host issued
forth, footmen and horsemen; and mighty din arose.

So when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed
they targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed
shields pressed each on each, and mighty din arose. Then were heard the
voice of groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and
the slain, and the earth streamed with blood.

Now while it yet was morn and the divine day waxed, so long from either
side lighted the darts amain and the people fell. But when the sun
bestrode mid-heaven, then did the Father balance his golden scales, and
put therein two fates of death that layeth men at their length, one for
horse-taming Trojans, one for mail-clad Achaians; and he took the
scale-yard by the midst and lifted it, and the Achaians’ day of destiny
sank down. So lay the Achaians’ fates on the bounteous earth, and the
Trojans’ fates were lifted up towards wide heaven. And the god
thundered aloud from Ida, and sent his blazing flash amid the host of
the Achaians; and they saw and were astonished, and pale fear gat hold
upon all.

Then had Idomeneus no heart to stand, neither Agamemnon, neither stood
the twain Aiantes, men of Ares’ company. Only Nestor of Gerenia stood
his ground, he the Warden of the Achaians; neither he of purpose, but
his horse was fordone, which noble Alexandros, beauteous-haired Helel’s
lord, had smitten with an arrow upon the top of the crest where the
foremost hairs of horses grow upon the skull; and there is the most
deadly spot. So the horse leapt up in anguish and the arrow sank into
his brain, and he brought confusion on the steeds as he writhed upon
the dart. While the old man leapt forth and with his sword began to hew
the traces, came Hector’s fleet horses through the tumult, bearing a
bold charioteer, even Hecktor. And now had the old man lost his life,
but that Diomedes of the loud war-cry was swift to mark. Terribly
shouted he, summoning Odysseus: “Heaven-born son of Laertes, Odysseus
of many wiles, whither fleest thou with thy back turned, like a coward
in the throng? Beware lest as thou fleest one plant a spear between thy
shoulders. Nay, stand thy ground, till we thrust back from the old man
his furious foe.”

So spake he, but much-enduring noble Odysseus heard him not, but
hastened by to the hollow ships of the Achaians. Yet Tydeides, though
but one, mingled amid the fighters in the forefront, and took his stand
before the steeds of the old man, Neleus’ son, and spake to him winged
words, and said: “Old man, of a truth young warriors beset thee hard;
and thy force is abated, and old age is sore upon thee, and thy squire
is but a weakling, and thy steeds are slow. Come then, mount upon my
car, that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or fleeing hither or thither very fleetly across
the plain, even those that erst I took from Aineias inspirer of fear.
Thine let our squires tend, and these let us guide straight against the
horse-taming Trojans, that even Hector may know whether my spear also
rageth in my hands.”

So said he, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia disregarded not. Then the
two squires tended Nestor’s horses, even Sthenelos the valiant and
kindly Eurymedon: and the other twain both mounted upon Diomedes’ car.
And Nestor took into his hands the shining reins, and lashed the
horses; and soon they drew nigh Hector. Then Tydeus’ son hurled at him
as he charged straight upon them: him missed he, but his squire that
drave his chariot, Eniopeus, high-hearted Thebaios’ son, even him as he
held the reins, he smote upon the breast beside the nipple. So he fell
from out the car, and his fleet-footed horses swerved aside; and there
his soul and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief encompassed Hector’s
soul for sake of his charioteer. Yet left he him there lying, though he
sorrowed for his comrade, and drave in quest of a bold charioteer; and
his horses lacked not long a master, for anon he found Iphitos’ son,
bold Archeptolemos, and him he made mount behind his fleet horses, and
gave the reins into his hands.

Then had destruction come and deeds beyond remedy been wrought, and so
had they been penned in Ilios like lambs, had not the father of gods
and men been swift to mark. So he thundered terribly and darted his
white lightning and hurled it before Diomedes’ steeds to earth; and
there arose a terrible flame of sulphur burning, and the two horses
were affrighted and cowered beneath the car. And the shining reins
dropped from Nestor’s hands, and he was afraid at heart and spake to
Diomedes: “Come now Tydeides, turn back thy whole-hooved horses to
flight: seest thou not that victory from Zeus attendeth not on thee?
Now doth Kronos’ son vouchsafe glory to this Hector, for the day;
hereafter shall he grant it us likewise, if he will. A man may not at
all ward off the will of Zeus, not though one be very valiant; he
verily is mightier far.”

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry answered him: “Yea verily, old man,
all this thou sayest is according unto right. But this is the sore
grief that entereth my heart and soul: Hector some day shall say as he
maketh harangue amid the Trojans: ‘Tydeides betook him to the ships in
flight before my face.’ So shall he boast—in that day let the wide
earth yawn for me.”

So spake he and turned the whole-hooved horses to flight, back through
the tumult; and the Trojans and Hector with wondrous uproar poured upon
them their dolorous darts. And over him shouted loudly great Hector of
the glancing helm: “Tydeides, the fleet-horsed Danaans were wont to
honour thee with the highest place, and meats, and cups brimful, but
now will they disdain thee; thou art after all no better than a woman.
Begone, poor puppet; not for my flinching shalt thou climb on our
towers, neither carry our wives away upon thy ships; ere that will I
deal thee thy fate.”

So said he, and Tydeides was of divided mind, whether to wheel his
horses and fight him face to face. Thrice doubted he in heart and soul,
and thrice from Ida’s mountains thundered Zeus the lord of counsel, and
gave to the Trojans a sign, the turning of the course of battle. And
Hector with loud shout called to the Trojans: “Trojans and Lykians and
Dardanians that love close fight, be men, my friends, and bethink you
of impetuous valour. I perceive that of good will Kronion vouchsafest
me victory and great glory, and to the Danaans destruction. Fools, that
devised these walls weak and of none account; they shall not withhold
our fury, and lightly shall our steeds overleap the delved foss. But
when I be once come amid the hollow ships, then be thought taken of
consuming fire, that with fire I may burn the ships and slay the men.”

So spake he and shouted to his steeds, and said: “Xanthos, and thou
Podargos, and Aithon and goodly Lampos, now pay me back your tending,
even the abundance that Andromache, great-hearted Eetiol’s daughter,
set before you of honey-hearted wheat, and mingled wine to drink at the
heart’s bidding. Pursue ye now and haste, that we may seize Nestor’s
shield, the fame whereof now reacheth unto heaven, how that it is of
gold throughout, armrods and all; and may seize moreover from
horse-taming Diomedes’ shoulders his richly dight breastplate that
Hephaistos wrought cunningly. Could we but take these, then might I
hope this very night to make the Achaians to embark on their fleet
ships.”

And now had he burned the trim ships with blazing fire, but that queen
Hera put it in Agamemnol’s heart himself to bestir him and swiftly
arouse the Achaians. So he went his way along the huts and ships of the
Achaians, holding a great cloak of purple in his stalwart hand, and
stood by Odysseus’ black ship of mighty burden, that was in the midst,
so that a voice could be heard to either end. Then shouted he in a
piercing voice, and called to the Danaans aloud: “Fie upon you,
Argives, ye sorry things of shame, so brave in semblance! Whither are
gone our boastings when we said that we were bravest, the boasts ye
uttered vaingloriously when in Lemnos, as ye ate your fill of flesh of
tall-horned oxen and drank goblets crowned with wine, and said that
every man should stand in war to face fivescore yea tenscore Trojans?
yet now can we not match one, even this Hector that anon will burn our
ships with flame of fire. O Father Zeus, didst ever thou blind with
such a blindness any mighty king, and rob him of great glory? Nay,
Zeus, this hope fulfil thou me; suffer that we ourselves at least flee
and escape, neither suffer that the Achaians be thus vanquished of the
Trojans.”

So spake he, and the Father had pity on him as he wept, and vouchsafed
him that his folk should be saved and perish not. Forthwith sent he an
eagle—surest sign among winged fowl—holding in his claws a fawn, the
young of a fleet hind; beside the beautiful altar of Zeus he let fall
the fawn, where the Achaians did sacrifice unto Zeus lord of all
oracles. So when they saw that the bird was come from Zeus, they sprang
the more upon the Trojans and bethought them of the joy of battle.

Now could no man of the Danaans, for all they were very many, boast
that he before Tydeus’ son had guided his fleet horses forth, and
driven them across the trench and fought man to man; first by far was
Tydeides to slay a warrior of the Trojans in full array, even Agelaos
son of Phradmon. Now he had turned his steeds to flee; but as he
wheeled the other plunged the spear into his back between his
shoulders, and drave it through his breast. So fell he from his
chariot, and his armour clanged upon him.

And after him came Atreus’ sons, even Agamemnon and Menelaos, and after
them the Aiantes clothed upon with impetuous valour, and after them
Idomeneus and Idomeneus’ brother in arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios
slayer of men, and after them Eurypylos, Euaimol’s glorious son. And
ninth came Teukros, stretching his back-bent bow, and took his stand
beneath the shield of Aias son of Telamon. And so Aias would stealthily
withdraw the shield, and Teukros would spy his chance; and when he had
shot and smitten one in the throng, then fell such an one and gave up
the ghost, and Teukros would return, and as a child beneath his mother,
so gat he him to Aias; who hid him with the shining shield.

And Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to behold him making havoc with his
stalwart bow of the battalions of the Trojans, and he came and stood by
his side and spake to him, saying: “Teukros, dear heart, thou son of
Telamon, prince of the host, shoot on in this wise, if perchance thou
mayest be found the salvation of the Danaans and glory of thy father
Telamon.”

And noble Teukros made answer and said to him: “Most noble son of
Atreus, why urgest thou me that myself am eager? Verily with such
strength as is in me forbear I not, but ever since we drave them
towards Ilios I watch with my bow to slay the foemen. Eight long-barbed
arrows have I now sped, and all are buried in the flesh of young men
swift in battle; only this mad dog can I not smite.”

He said, and shot another arrow from the string right against Hector;
and his heart was fain to smite him. Yet missed he once again, for
Apollo turned the dart away; but Archeptolemos, Hector’s bold
charioteer, he smote on the breast beside the nipple as he hasted into
battle: so he fell from his car and his fleet-footed horses swerved
aside; and there his soul and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief
encompassed Hector’s soul for his charioteer’s sake; yet left he him,
though he sorrowed for his comrade, and bade Kebriones his own brother,
being hard by, take the chariot reins; and he heard and disregarded
not. And himself he leapt to earth from the resplendent car, with a
terrible shout; and in his hand he caught a stone, and made right at
Teukros, and his heart bade him smite him. Now Teukros had plucked
forth from his quiver a keen arrow, and laid it on the string; but even
as he drew it back, Hector of the glancing helm smote him with the
jagged stone, as he aimed eagerly against him, even beside his
shoulder, where the collar-bone fenceth off neck and breast, and where
is the most deadly spot; and he brake the bowstring, and his hand from
the wrist grew numb, and he stayed fallen upon his knee, and his bow
dropped from his hand. But Aias disregarded not his brother’s fall, but
ran and strode across him and hid him with his shield. Then two trusty
comrades bent down to him, even Mekisteus son of Echios and goodly
Alastor, and bare him, groaning sorely, to the hollow ships. And once
again the Olympian aroused the spirit of the Trojans. So they drove the
Achaians straight toward the deep foss, and amid the foremost went
Hector exulting in his strength. And even as when a hound behind wild
boar or lion, with swift feet pursuing snatcheth at him, at flank or
buttock, and watcheth for him as he wheeleth, so Hector pressed hard on
the flowing-haired Achaians, slaying ever the hindmost, and they fled
on. But when they were passed in flight through palisade and foss, and
many were fallen beneath the Trojans’ hands, then halted they and
tarried beside the ships, calling one upon another, and lifting up
their hands to all the gods prayed each one instantly. But Hector
wheeled round his beauteous-maned steeds this way and that, and his
eyes were as the eyes of Gorgon or Ares bane of mortals.

Now at the sight of them the white-armed goddess Hera had compassion,
and anon spake winged words to Athene: “Out on it, thou child of
aegis-bearing Zeus, shall not we twain any more take thought for the
Danaans that perish, if only for this last time? Now will they fill up
the measure of evil destiny and perish by one mal’s onslaught; seeing
that he is furious now beyond endurance, this Hector son of Priam, and
verily hath wrought many a deed of ill.”

And the bright-eyed goddess Athene made answer to her, “Yea in good
sooth, may this fellow yield up strength and life, and perish at the
Argives’ hands in his native land; only mine own sire is furious, with
no good intent, headstrong, ever sinful, the foiler of my purposes. But
now make thou ready our whole-hooved horses, while I enter into the
palace of aegis-bearing Zeus and gird me in my armour for battle, that
I may see if Priam’s son, Hector of the glancing helm, shall be glad at
the appearing of us twain amid the highways of the battle. Surely shall
many a Trojan likewise glut dogs and birds with fat and flesh, fallen
dead at the ships of the Achaians.”

So said she, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not. But when
father Zeus beheld from Ida, he was sore wroth, and sped Iris
golden-winged to bear a message: “Go thy way, fleet Iris, turn them
back, neither suffer them to face me; for in no happy wise shall we
join in combat. For thus will I declare, and even so shall the
fulfilment be; I will maim their fleet horses in the chariot, and them
will I hurl out from the car, and will break in pieces the chariot;
neither within the courses of ten years shall they heal them of the
wounds the thunderbolt shall tear; that the bright-eyed one may know
the end when she striveth against her father. But with Hera have I not
so great indignation nor wrath: seeing it ever is her wont to thwart
me, whate’er I have decreed.”

So said he, and whirlwind-footed Iris arose to bear the message, and
departed from the mountains of Ida unto high Olympus. And even at the
entrance of the gates of Olympus many-folded she met them and stayed
them, and told them the saying of Zeus.

And father Zeus drave from Ida his fair-wheeled chariot and horses unto
Olympus, and came unto the session of the gods. For him also the noble
Shaker of Earth unyoked the steeds, and set the car upon the stand, and
spread a cloth thereover; and far-seeing Zeus himself sate upon his
golden throne, and beneath his feet great Olympus quaked. Only Athene
and Hera sate apart from Zeus, and spake no word to him neither
questioned him. But he was ware thereof in his heart, and said, “Why
are ye thus vexed, Athene and Hera? Surely ye are not wearied of making
havoc in glorious battle of the Trojans, for whom ye cherish bitter
hate! Howsoever, seeing that my might is so great and my hands
invincible, all the gods that are in Olympus could not turn me: and for
you twain, trembling erst gat hold upon your bright limbs ere that ye
beheld war and war’s fell deeds. For thus will I declare, and even so
had the fulfilment been—never had ye, once smitten with the
thunderbolt, fared on your chariots back unto Olympus where is the
habitation of the immortals.”

So spake he, and Athene and Hera murmured, that were sitting by him and
devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace, and said not
anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold upon her;
but Hera’s heart contained not her anger, and she spake: “Most dread
son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast said? Well know we, even we,
that thy might is no wise puny; yet still have we pity for the Danaan
spearmen, that now shall perish and fill up the measure of grievous
fate.”

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said: “At morn shalt thou
behold most mighty Kronion, if thou wilt have it so, O Hera, ox-eyed
queen, making yet more havoc of the vast army of Argive spearmen; for
headlong Hector shall not refrain from battle till that Peleus’ son
fleet of foot have arisen beside the ships, that day when these shall
fight amid the sterns in most grievous stress, around Patroklos fallen.
Such is the doom of heaven. And for thine anger reck I not, not even
though thou go to the nethermost bounds of earth and sea, where sit
Iapetos and Kronos and have no joy in the beams of Hyperion the
Sun-god, neither in any breeze, but deep Tartaros is round about them.
Though thou shouldest wander till thou come even thither, yet reck I
not of thy vexation, seeing there is no thing more unabashed than
thou.”

So said he, but white-armed Hera spake him no word. And the sul’s
bright light dropped into Ocean, drawing black night across Earth the
grain-giver. Against the Trojans’ will daylight departed, but welcome,
thrice prayed for, to the Achaians came down the murky night.

Now glorious Hector made an assembly of the Trojans, taking them apart
from the ships, beside the eddying river, in an open space where was
found a spot clear of dead. And they came down from their chariots to
the ground to hear the word that Hector, dear unto Zeus, proclaimed. He
in his hand held his spear eleven cubits long; before his face gleamed
the spearhead of bronze, and a ring of gold ran round about it. Thereon
he leaned and spake to the Trojans, saying: “Hearken to me, Trojans and
Dardanians and allies. I thought but now to make havoc of the ships and
all the Achaians and depart back again to windy Ilios; but dusk came
too soon, and that in chief hath now saved the Argives and the ships
beside the beach of the sea. So let us now yield to black night, and
make our supper ready; unyoke ye from the chariots your fair-maned
horses, and set fodder beside them. And from the city bring kine and
goodly sheep with speed; and provide you with honey-hearted wine, and
corn from your houses, and gather much wood withal, that all night long
until early-springing dawn we may burn many fires, and the gleam may
reach to heaven; lest perchance even by night the flowing-haired
Achaians strive to take flight over the broad back of the sea. Verily
must they not embark upon their ships unvexed, at ease: but see ye that
many a one of them have a wound to nurse even at home, being stricken
with arrow or keen-pointed spear as he leapeth upon his ship; that so
many another man may dread to wage dolorous war on the horse-taming men
of Troy. And let the heralds dear to Zeus proclaim throughout the city
that young maidens and old men of hoary heads camp round the city on
the battlements builded of the gods; and let the women folk burn a
great fire each in her hall; and let there be a sure watch set, lest an
ambush enter the city when the host is absent. Howbeit for the night
will we guard our own selves, and at morn by daybreak, arrayed in our
armour, let us awake keen battle at the hollow ships. I will know
whether Tydeus’ son stalwart Diomedes shall thrust me from the ships
back to the wall, or I shall lay him low with my spear and bear away
his gory spoils. To-morrow shall he prove his valour, whether he can
abide the onslaught of my spear. Would that I were immortal and ageless
all my days and honoured like as Athene is honoured and Apollo, so
surely as this day bringeth the Argives ill.”

So Hector made harangue, and the Trojans clamoured applause. And they
loosed their sweating steeds from the yoke, and tethered them with
thongs, each man beside his chariot; and from the city they brought
kine and goodly sheep with speed, and provided them with honey-hearted
wine and corn from their houses, and gathered much wood withal. And
from the plain the winds bare into heaven the sweet savour. But these
with high hopes sate them all night along the highways of the battle,
and their watchfires burned in multitude. Even as when in heaven the
stars about the bright moon shine clear to see, when the air is
windless, and all the peaks appear and the tall headlands and glades,
and from heaven breaketh open the infinite air, and all stars are seen,
and the shepherd’s heart is glad; even in like multitude between the
ships and the streams of Xanthos appeared the watchfires that the
Trojans kindled in front of Ilios. A thousand fires burned in the plain
and by the side of each sate fifty in the gleam of blazing fire. And
the horses champed white barley and spelt, and standing by their
chariots waited for the throned Dawn.



BOOK IX.

How Agamemnon sent an embassage to Achilles, beseeching him to be
appeased; and how Achilles denied him.


Thus kept the Trojans watch; but the Achaians were holden of
heaven-sent panic, handmaid of palsying fear, and all their best were
stricken to the heart with grief intolerable. Like as two winds stir up
the main, the home of fishes, even the north wind and the west wind
that blow from Thrace, coming suddenly; and the dark billow straightway
lifteth up its crest and casteth much tangle out along the sea; even so
was the Achaians’ spirit troubled in their breast.

But Atreides was stricken to the heart with sore grief, and went about
bidding the clear-voiced heralds summon every man by name to the
assembly, but not to shout aloud; and himself he toiled amid the
foremost. So they sat sorrowful in assembly, and Agamemnon stood up
weeping like unto a fountain of dark water that from a beetling cliff
poureth down its black stream; even so with deep groaning he spake amid
the Argives and said: “My friends, leaders and captains of the Argives,
Zeus son of Kronos hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of
soul; hard of heart is he, for that erewhile he promised and gave his
pledge that not till I had laid waste well-walled Ilios should I
depart, but now hath planned a cruel wile, and biddeth me return in
dishonour to Argos with the loss of many of my folk. Such meseemeth is
the good pleasure of most mighty Zeus, that hath laid low the heads of
many cities, yea and shall lay low; for his is highest power. So come,
even as I shall bid let us all obey; let us flee with our ships to our
dear native land, for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy.”

So said he, and they all held their peace and kept silence. Long time
were the sons of the Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last
Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake amid them and said: “Atreides: with
thee first in thy folly will I contend, where it is just, O king, even
in the assembly; be not thou wroth therefor. My valour didst thou blame
in chief amid the Danaans, and saidst that I was no man of war but a
coward; and all this know the Argives both young and old. But the son
of crooked-counselling Kronos hath endowed thee but by halves; he
granted thee to have the honour of the sceptre above all men, but
valour he gave thee not, wherein is highest power. Sir, deemest thou
that the sons of the Achaians are thus indeed cowards and weaklings as
thou sayest? If thine own heart be set on departing, go thy way; the
way is before thee, and thy ships stand beside the sea, even the great
multitude that followed thee from Mykene. But all the other
flowing-haired Achaians will tarry here until we lay waste Troy. Nay,
let them too flee on their ships to their dear native land; yet will we
twain, even I and Sthenelos, fight till we attain the goal of Ilios;
for in God’s name are we come.”

So said he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted aloud, applauding
the saying of horse-taming Diomedes. Then knightly Nestor arose and
said amid them: “Tydeides, in battle art thou passing mighty, and in
council art thou best among thine equals in years; none of all the
Achaians will make light of thy word nor gainsay it. Now let us yield
to black night and make ready our meal; and let the sentinels bestow
them severally along the deep-delved foss without the wall. This charge
give I to the young men; and thou, Atreides, lead then the way, for
thou art the most royal. Spread thou a feast for the councillors; that
is thy place and seemly for thee. Thy huts are full of wine that the
ships of the Achaians bring thee by day from Thrace across the wide
sea; all entertainment is for thee, being king over many. In the
gathering of many shalt thou listen to him that deviseth the most
excellent counsel; sore need have all the Achaians of such as is good
and prudent, because hard by the ships our foemen are burning their
watch-fires in multitude; what man can rejoice thereat? This night
shall either destroy or save the host.”

So said he, and they gladly hearkened to him and obeyed. Forth sallied
the sentinels in their harness. Seven were the captains of the
sentinels, and with each went fivescore young men bearing their long
spears in their hands; and they took post midway betwixt foss and wall,
and kindled a fire and made ready each man his meal.

Then Atreides gathered the councillors of the Achaians, and led them to
his hut, and spread before them an abundant feast. So they put forth
their hands to the good cheer that lay before them. And when they had
put away from them the desire of meat and drink, then the old man first
began to weave his counsel, even Nestor, whose rede of old time was
approved the best. He spake to them and said: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, in thy name will I end and with thy name
begin, because thou art king over many hosts, and to thy hand Zeus hath
entrusted sceptre and law, that thou mayest take counsel for thy folk.
Thee therefore more than any it behoveth both to speak and hearken, and
to accomplish what another than thou may say. No other man shall have a
more excellent thought than this that I bear in mind from old time even
until now, since the day when thou, O heaven-sprung king, didst go and
take the damsel Briseis from angry Achilles’ hut by no consent of ours.
Nay, I right heartily dissuaded thee; but thou yieldedst to thy proud
spirit, and dishonouredst a man of valour whom even the immortals
honoured; for thou didst take and keepest from him his meed of valour.
Still let us even now take thought how we may appease him and persuade
him with gifts of friendship and kindly words.”

And Agamemnon king of men answered and said to him: “Old sir, in no
false wise hast thou accused my folly. Fool was I, I myself deny it
not. Worth many hosts is he whom Zeus loveth in his heart, even as now
he honoureth this man and destroyeth the host of the Achaians. But
seeing I was a fool in that I yielded to my sorry passion, I will make
amends and give a recompense beyond telling. In the midst of you all I
will name the excellent gifts; seven tripods untouched of fire, and ten
talents of gold and twenty gleaming caldrons, and twelve stalwart
horses, winners in the race, that have taken prizes by their speed. No
lackwealth were that man whose substance were as great as the prizes my
whole-hooved steeds have borne me off. And seven women will I give,
skilled in excellent handiwork, Lesbians whom I chose me from the
spoils the day that he himself took stablished Lesbos, surpassing
womankind in beauty. These will I give him, and with them shall be she
whom erst I took from him, even the daughter of Briseus. All these
things shall be set straightway before him; and if hereafter the gods
grant us to lay waste the great city of Priam, then let him enter in
when we Achaians be dividing the spoil, and lade his ship full of gold
and bronze, and himself choose twenty Trojan women, the fairest that
there be after Helen of Argos. And if we win to the richest of lands,
even Achaian Argos, he shall be my son and I will hold him in like
honour with Orestes, my stripling boy that is nurtured in all
abundance. Three daughters are mine in my well-builded hall,
Chrysothemis and Laodike and Iphianassa; let him take of them which he
will, without gifts of wooing, to Peleus’ house; and I will add a great
dower such as no man ever yet gave with his daughter. And seven
well-peopled cities will I give him, Kardamyle and Enope and grassy
Hire and holy Pherai and Antheia deep in meads, and fair Aipeia and
Pedasos land of vines. And all are nigh to the salt sea, on the
uttermost border of sandy Pylos; therein dwell men abounding in flocks
and kine, men that shall worship him like a god with gifts, and beneath
his sway fulfil his prosperous ordinances. All this will I accomplish
so he but cease from wrath. Let him yield; Hades I ween is not to be
softened neither overcome, and therefore is he hatefullest of all gods
to mortals. Yea, let him be ruled by me, inasmuch as I am more royal
and avow me to be the elder in years.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered and said: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, now are these gifts not lightly to be
esteemed that thou offerest king Achilles. Come therefore, let us speed
forth picked men to go with all haste to the hut of Peleus’ son
Achilles. Lo now, whomsoever I appoint let them consent. First let
Phoinix dear to Zeus lead the way, and after him great Aias and noble
Odysseus; and for heralds let Odios and Eurybates be their companions.
And now bring water for our hands, and bid keep holy silence, that we
may pray unto Zeus the son of Kronos, if perchance he will have mercy
upon us.”

So said he, and spake words that were well-pleasing unto all. Forthwith
the heralds poured water on their hands, and the young men crowned the
bowls with drink and gave each man his portion after they had poured
the libation in the cups. And when they had made libation and drunk as
their heart desired, they issued forth from the hut of Agamemnon son of
Atreus. And knightly Nestor of Gerenia gave them full charge, with many
a glance to each, and chiefest to Odysseus, how they should essay to
prevail on Peleus’ noble son.

So the twain went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, making
instant prayer to the earth-embracer, the Shaker of the Earth, that
they might with ease prevail on Aiakides’ great heart. So they came to
the huts and ships of the Myrmidons, and found their king taking his
pleasure of a loud lyre, fair, of curious work, with a silver cross-bar
upon it. Therein he was delighting his soul, and singing the glories of
heroes. And over against him sate Patroklos alone in silence, watching
till Aiakides should cease from singing. So the twain came forward, and
noble Odysseus led the way, and they stood before his face; and
Achilles sprang up amazed with the lyre in his hand, and left the seat
where he was sitting, and in like manner Patroklos when he beheld the
men arose. Then Achilles fleet of foot greeted them and said: “Welcome;
verily ye are friends that are come—sore indeed is the need—even ye
that are dearest of the Achaians to me even in my wrath.”

So spake noble Achilles and led them forward, and made them sit on
settles and carpets of purple; and anon he spake to Patroklos being
near: “Bring forth a greater bowl, thou son of Menoitios; mingle
stronger drink, and prepare each man a cup, for dearest of men are
these that are under my roof.”

Then put they forth their hands to the good cheer lying before them.
And when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Aias
nodded to Phoinix. But noble Odysseus marked it, and filled a cup with
wine and pledged Achilles: “Hail, O Achilles! The fair feast lack we
not either in the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus neither now in thine;
for feasting is there abundance to our heart’s desire, but our thought
is not for matters of the delicious feast; nay, we behold very sore
destruction, thou fosterling of Zeus, and are afraid. Now is it in
doubt whether we save the benched ships or behold them perish, if thou
put not on thy might. Nigh unto ships and wall have the high-hearted
Trojans and famed allies pitched their camp, and kindled many fires
throughout their host, and ween that they shall no more be withheld but
will fall on our black ships. And Zeus son of Kronos sheweth them signs
upon the right by lightning, and Hector greatly exulteth in his might
and rageth furiously, trusting in Zeus, and recketh not of god nor man,
for mighty madness hath possessed him. He prayeth bright Dawn to shine
forth with all speed, for he bath passed his word to smite off from the
ships the ensigns’ tops, and to fire the hulls with devouring flame,
and hard thereby to make havoc of the Achaians confounded by the smoke.
Therefore am I sore afraid in my heart lest the gods fulfil his
boastings, and it be fated for us to perish here in Troy-land, far from
Argos pasture-land of horses. Up then! if thou art minded even at the
last to save the failing sons of the Achaians from the war-din of the
Trojans. Eschew thy grievous wrath; Agamemnon offereth thee worthy
gifts, so thou wilt cease from anger. Lo now, hearken thou to me, and I
will tell thee all the gifts that in his hut Agamemnon promised thee.
But if Agamemnon be too hateful to thy heart, both he and his gifts,
yet have thou pity on all the Achaians that faint throughout the host;
these shall honour thee as a god, for verily thou wilt earn exceeding
great glory at their hands. Yea now mightest thou slay Hector, for he
would come very near thee in his deadly madness, because he deemeth
that there is no man like unto him among the Danaans that the ships
brought hither.”

And Achilles fleet of foot answered and said unto him: “Heaven-sprung
son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, in openness must I now declare
unto you my saying, even as I am minded and as the fulfilment thereof
shall be, that ye may not sit before me and coax this way and that. For
hateful to me even as the gates of hell is he that hideth one thing in
his heart and uttereth another: but I will speak what meseemeth best.
Not me, I ween, shall Agamemnon son of Atreus persuade, nor the other
Danaans, seeing we were to have no thank for battling with the foemen
ever without respite. He that abideth at home hath equal share with him
that fighteth his best, and in like honour are held both the coward and
the brave; death cometh alike to the untoiling and to him that hath
toiled long. Neither have I any profit for that I endured tribulation
of soul, ever staking my life in fight. Even as a hen bringeth her
unfledged chickens each morsel as she winneth it, and with herself it
goeth hard, even so I was wont to watch out many a sleepless night and
pass through many bloody days of battle, warring with folk for their
womel’s sake. Twelve cities of men have I laid waste from ship-board,
and from land eleven, throughout deep-soiled Troy-land; out of all
these took I many goodly treasures and would bring and give them all to
Agamemnon son of Atreus, and he staying behind amid the fleet ships
would take them and portion out some few but keep the most. Now some he
gave to be meeds of honour to the princes and the kings, and theirs are
left untouched; only from me of all the Achaians took he my darling
lady and keepeth her. But why must the Argives make war on the Trojans?
why hath Atreides gathered his host and led them hither? is it not for
lovely-haired Helel’s sake? Do then the sons of Atreus alone of mortal
men love their wives? surely whatsoever man is good and sound of mind
loveth his own and cherisheth her, even as I too loved mine with all my
heart, though but the captive of my spear. But now that he hath taken
my meed of honour from mine arms and hath deceived me, let him not
tempt me that know him full well; he shall not prevail. Nay, Odysseus,
let him take counsel with thee and all the princes to ward from the
ships the consuming fire. Verily without mine aid he hath wrought many
things, and built a wall and dug a foss about it wide and deep, and set
a palisade therein; yet even so can he not stay murderous Hector’s
might. But so long as I was fighting amid the Achaians, Hector had no
mind to array his battle far from the wall, but scarce came unto the
Skaian gates and to the oak-tree; there once he awaited me alone and
scarce escaped my onset. But now, seeing I have no mind to fight with
noble Hector, I will to-morrow do sacrifice to Zeus and all the gods,
and store well my ships when I have launched them on the salt sea—then
shalt thou see, if thou wilt and hast any care therefor, my ships
sailing at break of day over Hellespont, the fishes’ home, and my men
right eager at the oar; and if the great Shaker of the Earth grant me
good journey, on the third day should I reach deep-soiled Phthia. There
are my great possessions that I left when I came hither to my hurt; and
yet more gold and ruddy bronze shall I bring from hence, and
fair-girdled women and grey iron, all at least that were mine by lot;
only my meed of honour hath he that gave it me taken back in his
despitefulness, even lord Agamemnon son of Atreus. To him declare ye
everything even as I charge you, openly, that all the Achaians likewise
may have indignation, if haply he hopeth to beguile yet some other
Danaan, for that he is ever clothed in shamelessness. Verily not in my
face would he dare to look, though he have the front of a dog. Neither
will I devise counsel with him nor any enterprise, for utterly he hath
deceived me and done wickedly; but never again shall he beguile me with
fair speech—let this suffice him. Let him begone in peace; Zeus the
lord of counsel hath taken away his wits. Hateful to me are his gifts,
and I hold him at a straw’s worth. Not even if he gave me ten times,
yea twenty, all that now is his, and all that may come to him
otherwhence, even all the revenue of Orchomenos or Egyptian Thebes
where the treasure-houses are stored fullest—Thebes of the hundred
gates, whence sally forth two hundred warriors through each with horses
and chariots—nay, nor gifts in number as sand or dust; not even so
shall Agamemnon persuade my soul till he have paid me back all the
bitter despite. And the daughter of Agamemnon son of Atreus will I not
wed, not were she rival of golden Aphrodite for fairness and for
handiwork matched bright-eyed Athene—not even then will I wed her; let
him choose him of the Achaians another that is his peer and is more
royal than I. For if the gods indeed preserve me and I come unto my
home, then will Peleus himself seek me a wife. Many Achaian maidens are
there throughout Hellas and Phthia, daughters of princes that ward
their cities; whomsoever of these I wish will I make my dear lady. Very
often was my high soul moved to take me there a wedded wife, a help
meet for me, and have joy of the possessions that the old man Peleus
possesseth. For not of like worth with life hold I even all the wealth
that men say was possessed of the well-peopled city of Ilios in days of
peace gone by, before the sons of the Achaians came; neither all the
treasure that the stone threshold of the archer Phoebus Apollo
encompasseth in rocky Pytho. For kine and goodly flocks are to be had
for the harrying, and tripods and chestnut horses for the purchasing;
but to bring back mal’s life neither harrying nor earning availeth when
once it hath passed the barrier of his lips. For thus my goddess mother
telleth me, Thetis the silver-footed, that twain fates are bearing me
to the issue of death. If I abide here and besiege the Trojans’ city,
then my returning home is taken from me, but my fame shall be
imperishable; but if I go home to my dear native land, my high fame is
taken from me, but my life shall endure long while, neither shall the
issue of death soon reach me. Moreover I would counsel you all to set
sail homeward, seeing ye shall never reach your goal of steep Ilios; of
a surety far-seeing Zeus holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of
good courage. So go your way and tell my answer to the princes of the
Achaians, even as is the office of elders, that they may devise in
their hearts some other better counsel, such as shall save them their
ships and the host of the Achaians amid the hollow ships: since this
counsel availeth them naught that they have now devised, by reason of
my fierce wrath. But let Phoinix now abide with us and lay him to rest,
that he may follow with me on my ships to our dear native land
to-morrow, if he will; for I will not take him perforce.”

So spake he, and they all held their peace and were still, and
marvelled at his saying; for he denied them very vehemently. But at the
last spake to them the old knight Phoinix, bursting into tears, because
he was sore afraid for the ships of the Achaians: “If indeed thou
ponderest departure in thy heart, glorious Achilles, and hast no mind
at all to save the fleet ships from consuming fire, because that wrath
bath entered into thy heart; how can I be left of thee, dear son, alone
thereafter? To thee did the old knight Peleus send me the day he sent
thee to Agamemnon forth from Phthia, a stripling yet unskilled in equal
war and in debate wherein men wax pre-eminent. Therefore sent he me to
teach thee all these things, to be both a speaker of words and a doer
of deeds. Yea, I reared thee to this greatness, thou godlike Achilles,
with my heart’s love; for with none other wouldest thou go unto the
feast, neither take meat in the hall, till that I had set thee upon my
knees and stayed thee with the savoury morsel cut first for thee, and
put the wine-cup to thy lips. Oft hast thou stained the doublet on my
breast with sputtering of wine in thy sorry helplessness. Thus I
suffered much with thee, and much I toiled, being mindful that the gods
in nowise created any issue of my body; but I made thee my son, thou
godlike Achilles, that thou mayest yet save me from grievous
destruction. Therefore, Achilles, rule thy high spirit; neither
beseemeth it thee to have a ruthless heart. Nay, even the very gods can
bend, and theirs withal is loftier majesty and honour and might. Nay,
come for the gifts; the Achaians shall honour thee even as a god. But
if without gifts thou enter into battle the bane of men, thou wilt not
be held in like honour, even though thou avert the fray.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: “Phoinix my
father, thou old man fosterling of Zeus, such honour need I in no wise;
for I deem that I have been honoured by the judgment of Zeus, which
shall abide upon me amid my beaked ships as long as breath tarrieth in
my body and my limbs are strong. Moreover I will say this thing to thee
and lay thou it to thine heart; trouble not my soul by weeping and
lamentation, to do the pleasure of warrior Atreides; neither beseemeth
it thee to cherish him, lest thou be hated of me that cherish thee. It
were good that thou with me shouldest vex him that vexeth me. Be thou
king even as I, and share my sway by halves, but these shall bear my
message. So tarry thou here and lay thee to rest in a soft bed, and
with break of day will we consider whether to depart unto our own, or
to abide.”

He spake, and nodded his brow in silence unto Patroklos to spread for
Phoinix a thick couch, that the others might bethink them to depart
from the hut with speed. Then spake to them Aias, Telamol’s godlike
son, and said: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles,
let us go hence; for methinks the purpose of our charge will not by
this journey be accomplished; and we must tell the news, though it be
no wise good, with all speed unto the Danaans, that now sit awaiting.
But Achilles hath wrought his proud soul to fury within him—stubborn
man, that recketh naught of his comrades’ love, wherein we worshipped
him beyond all men amid the ships—unmerciful! Yet doth a man accept
recompense of his brother’s murderer or for his dead son; and so the
man-slayer for a great price abideth in his own land, and the kinsmal’s
heart is appeased, and his proud soul, when he hath taken the
recompense. But for thee, the gods have put within thy breast a spirit
implacable and evil, by reason of one single damsel. And now we offer
thee seven damsels, far best of all, and many other gifts besides;
entertain thou then a kindly spirit, and have respect unto thine home;
because we are guests of thy roof, sent of the multitude of Danaans,
and we would fain be nearest to thee and dearest beyond all other
Achaians, as many as there be.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: “Aias sprung of
Zeus, thou son of Telamon, prince of the folk, thou seemest to speak
all this almost after mine own mind; but my heart swelleth with wrath
as oft as I bethink me of those things, how Atreides entreated me
arrogantly among the Argives, as though I were some worthless
sojourner. But go ye and declare my message; I will not take thought of
bloody war until that wise Priam’s son, noble Hector, come to the
Myrmidons’ huts and ships, slaying the Argives, and smirch the ships
with fire. But about mine hut and black ship I ween that Hector, though
he be very eager for battle, shall be refrained.”

So said he, and they took each man a two-handled cup, and made libation
and went back along the line of ships; and Odysseus led the way. And
Patroklos bade his fellows and handmaidens spread with all speed a
thick couch for Phoinix; and they obeyed and spread a couch as he
ordained, fleeces and rugs and fine flock of linen. Then the old man
laid him down and tarried for bright Dawn.

Now when those were come unto Atreides’ huts, the sons of the Achaians
stood up on this side and on that, and pledged them in cups of gold,
and questioned them; and Agamemnon king of men asked them first: “Come
now, tell me, Odysseus full of praise, thou great glory of the
Achaians; will he save the ships from consuming fire, or said he nay,
and hath wrath yet hold of his proud spirit?”

And steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him: “Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, he yonder hath no mind to quench his wrath, but
is yet more filled of fury, and spurneth thee and thy gifts. He biddeth
thee take counsel for thyself amid the Argives, how to save the ships
and folk of the Achaians. And for himself he threateneth that at break
of day he will launch upon the sea his trim well-benched ships.
Moreover he said that he would counsel all to sail for home, because ye
now shall never reach your goal of steep Ilios; surely far-seeing Zeus
holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of good courage. Even so
said he, and here are also these to tell the tale that were my
companions, Aias and the two heralds, both men discreet. But the old
man Phoinix laid him there to rest, even as Achilles bade him, that he
may follow with him on his ships to his dear native land to-morrow, if
he will; for he will not take him perforce.”

So said he, and they all held their peace and were still, marvelling at
his saying, for he harangued very vehemently. Long were the sons of the
Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last Diomedes of the loud
war-cry spake amid them: “Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of
men, would thou hadst never besought Peleus’ glorious son with offer of
gifts innumerable; proud is he at any time, but now hast thou yet far
more encouraged him in his haughtiness. Howbeit we will let him bide,
whether he go or tarry; hereafter he shall fight, whenever his heart
within him biddeth and god arouseth him. Come now, even as I shall say
let us all obey. Go ye now to rest, full to your hearts’ desire of meat
and wine, wherein courage is and strength; but when fair rosy-fingered
Dawn appeareth, array thou with all speed before the ships thy folk and
horsemen, and urge them on; and fight thyself amid the foremost.”

So said he, and all the princes gave assent, applauding the saying of
Diomedes tamer of horses. And then they made libation and went every
man to his hut, and there laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep.



BOOK X.

How Diomedes and Odysseus slew Dolon, a spy of the Trojans, and
themselves spied on the Trojan camp, and took the horses of Rhesos, the
Thracian king.


Now beside the ships the other leaders of the whole Achaian host were
sleeping all night long, by soft Sleep overcome, but Agamemnon son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, sweet Sleep held not, so many things he
debated in his mind. And even as when the lord of fair-tressed Hera
lighteneth, fashioning either a mighty rain unspeakable, or hail, or
snow, when the flakes sprinkle all the ploughed lands, or fashioning
perchance the wide mouth of bitter war, even so oft in his breast
groaned Agamemnon, from the very deep of his heart, and his spirits
trembled within him. And whensoever he looked toward that Trojan plain,
he marvelled at the many fires that blazed in front of Ilios, and at
the sound of flutes and pipes, and the noise of men; but whensoever to
the ships he glanced and the host of the Achaians, then rent he many a
lock clean forth from his head, to Zeus that is above, and greatly
groaned his noble heart.

And this in his soul seemed to him the best counsel, to go first of all
to Nestor son of Neleus, if perchance he might contrive with him some
right device that should be for the warding off of evil from all the
Danaans.

Then he rose, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
shining feet he bound on fair sandals, and thereafter clad him in the
tawny skin of a lion fiery and great, a skin that reached to the feet,
and he grasped his spear.

And even in like wise did trembling fear take hold on Menelaos, (for
neither on his eyelids did Sleep settle down,) lest somewhat should
befall the Argives, who verily for his sake over wide waters were come
to Troy-land, with fierce war in their thoughts.

With a dappled pard’s akin first he covered his broad shoulders, and he
raised and set on his head a casque of bronze, and took a spear in his
strong hand. Then went he on his way to rouse his brother, that
mightily ruled over all the Argives, and as a god was honoured by the
people. Him found he harnessing his goodly gear about his shoulders, by
the stern of the ship, and glad to his brother was his coming. Then
Menelaos of the loud war-cry first accosted him: “Wherefore thus, dear
brother, art thou arming? Wilt thou speed forth any of thy comrades to
spy on the Trojans? Nay, terribly I fear lest none should undertake for
thee this deed, even to go and spy out the foeman alone through the
ambrosial night; needs must he be a man right hardy of heart.”

Then the lord Agamemnon answered him and spake: “Need of good counsel
have I and thou, Menelaos fosterling of Zeus, of counsel that will help
and save the Argives and the ships, since the heart of Zeus hath turned
again. Surely on the sacrifices of Hector hath he set his heart rather
than on ours. For never did I see, nor heard any tell, that one man
devised so many terrible deeds in one day, as Hector, dear to Zeus,
hath wrought on the sons of the Achaians, unaided; though no dear son
of a goddess is he, nor of a god. He hath done deeds that methinks will
be a sorrow to the Argives, lasting and long, such evils hath he
devised against the Achaians. But go now, run swiftly by the ships, and
summon Aias and Idomeneus, but I will betake me to noble Nestor, and
bid him arise, if perchance he will be fain to go to the sacred company
of the sentinels and lay on them his command. For to him above others
would they listen, for his own son is chief among the sentinels, he and
the brother in arms of Idomeneus, even Meriones, for to them above all
we entrusted this charge.”

Then Menelaos of the loud war-cry answered him: “How meanest thou this
word wherewith thou dost command and exhort me? Am I to abide there
with them, waiting till thou comest, or run back again to thee when I
have well delivered to them thy commandment?”

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: “There do thou
abide lest we miss each other as we go, for many are the paths through
the camp. But call aloud, wheresoever thou goest, and bid men awake,
naming each man by his lineage, and his father’s name, and giving all
their dues of honour, nor be thou proud of heart. Nay rather let us
ourselves be labouring, for even thus did Zeus from our very birth
dispense to us the heaviness of toil.”

So he spake, and sent his brother away, having clearly laid on him his
commandment. Then went he himself after Nestor, the shepherd of the
host, whom he found by his hut and black ship, in his soft bed: beside
him lay his arms, a shield, and two spears, and a shining helmet.
Beside him lay his glittering girdle wherewith the old man was wont to
gird himself when he harnessed him for war, the bane of men, and led on
the host, for he yielded not to grievous old age. Then he raised him on
his elbow, lifting his head, and spake to the son of Atreus, inquiring
of him with this word: “Who art thou that farest alone by the ships,
through the camp in the dark night, when other mortals are sleeping?
Seekest thou one of thy mules, or of thy comrades? speak, and come not
silently upon me. What need hast thou?”

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: “O Nestor, son of
Neleus, great glory of the Achaians, thou shalt know Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, whom above all men Zeus hath planted for ever among labours,
while my breath abides within my breast, and my knees move. I wander
thus, for that sweet sleep rests not on mine eyes, but war is my care,
and the troubles of the Achaians. Yea, greatly I fear for the sake of
the Danaans, nor is my heart firm, but I am tossed to and fro, and my
heart is leaping from my breast, and my good knees tremble beneath me.
But if thou wilt do aught, since neither on thee cometh sleep, let us
go thither to the sentinels, that we may see them, lest they be fordone
with toil, and so are slumbering, and have quite forgotten to keep
watch. And hostile men camp hard by, nor know we at all but that they
are keen to do battle in the night.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Verily will I follow
after thee, but let us also rouse others again, both the son of Tydeus,
spearman renowned, and Odysseus, and swift Aias, and the strong son of
Phyleus. But well it would be if one were to go and call those also,
the godlike Aias, and Idomeneus the prince; for their ships are
furthest of all, and nowise close at hand. But Menelaos will I blame,
dear as he is and worshipful, yea, even if thou be angry with me, nor
will I hide my thought, for that he slumbereth, and to thee alone hath
left the toil; now should he be toiling among all the chiefs and
beseeching them, for need no longer tolerable is coming upon us.”

And the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: “Old man, another
day I even bid thee blame him, for often is he slack, and willeth not
to labour, yielding neither to unreadiness nor heedlessness of heart,
but looking toward me, and expecting mine instance. But now he awoke
far before me, and came to me, and him I sent forward to call those
concerning whom thou inquirest. But let us be gone, and them shall we
find before the gates, among the sentinels, for there I bade them
gather.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “So will none of the
Argives be wroth with him or disobey him, when soever he doth urge any
one, and give him his commands.”

So spake he, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
bright feet he bound goodly shoon, and all around him buckled a purple
cloak, with double folds and wide, and thick down all over it.

And he took a strong spear, pointed with sharp bronze, and he went
among the ships of the mail-clad Achaians. Then Odysseus first, the
peer of Zeus in counsel, did knightly Gerenian Nestor arouse out of
sleep, with his voice, and quickly the cry came all about his heart,
and he came forth from the hut and spake to them saying: “Wherefore
thus among the ships and through the camp do ye wander alone, in the
ambrosial night; what so great need cometh upon you?”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Laertes’ son, be not
wroth, for great trouble besetteth the Achaians. Nay follow, that we
may arouse others too, even all that it behoveth to take counsel,
whether we should fly, or fight.”

So spake he, and Odysseus of the many counsels came to the hut, and
cast a shield about his shoulders, and went after them.

And they went to seek Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and him they found
outside his hut, with his arms, and around him his comrades were
sleeping with their shields beneath their heads, but their spears were
driven into the ground erect on the spikes of the butts, and afar shone
the bronze, like the lightning of father Zeus. Now that hero was
asleep, and under him was strewn the hide of an ox of the field, but
beneath his head was stretched a shining carpet. Beside him went and
stood knightly Nestor of Gerenia and stirred him with a touch of his
foot, and aroused him, chiding him to his face, saying: “Wake, son of
Tydeus, why all night long dost thou sleep? Knowest thou not that the
Trojans on the high place of the plain are camped near the ships, and
but a little space holdeth them apart?”

So spake he, and Diomedes sprang swiftly up out of sleep, and spake to
him winged words: “Hard art thou, old man, and from toil thou never
ceasest. Now are there not other younger sons of the Achaians, who
might rouse when there is need each of the kings, going all around the
host? but thou, old man, art indomitable.”

And him knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered again, “Nay verily, my son,
all this that thou sayest is according unto right. Noble sons have I,
and there be many of the host, of whom each man might go and call the
others. But a right great need hath assailed the Achaians. For now to
all of us it standeth on a razor’s edge, either pitiful ruin for the
Achaians, or life. But come now, if indeed thou dost pity me, rouse
swift Aias, and the son of Phyleus, for thou art younger than I.”

So spake he, and Diomedes cast round his shoulders the skin of a great
fiery lion, that reached to his feet, and he grasped his spear, and
started on his way, and roused the others from their place and led them
on.

Now when they had come among the assembled sentinels, they found not
the leaders of the sentinels asleep, but they all sat wide awake with
their arms. And even as hounds keep difficult guard round the sheep in
a fold, having heard a hardy wild beast that cometh through the wood
among the hills, and much clamour riseth round him of hounds and men,
and sleep perisheth from them, even so sweet sleep did perish from
their eyes, as they watched through the wicked night, for ever were
they turning toward the plains, when they heard the Trojans moving.

And that old man was glad when he saw them, and heartened them with his
saying, and calling out to them he spake winged words: “Even so now,
dear children, do ye keep watch, nor let sleep take any man, lest we
become a cause of rejoicing to them that hate us.”

So saying he sped through the moat, and they followed with him, the
kings of the Argives, who had been called to the council. And with them
went Meriones, and the glorious son of Nestor, for they called them to
share their counsel. So they went clean out of the delved foss, and sat
down in the open, where the mid-space was clear of dead men fallen,
where fierce Hector had turned again from destroying the Argives, when
night covered all. There sat they down, and declared their saying each
to the other, and to them knightly Nestor of Gerenia began discourse:
“O friends, is there then no man that would trust to his own daring
spirit, to go among the great-hearted Trojans, if perchance he might
take some straggler of the enemy, yea, or hear perchance some rumour
among the Trojans, and what things they devise among themselves,
whether they are fain to abide there by the ships, away from the city,
or will retreat again to the city, now that they have conquered the
Achaians? All this might such an one learn, and back to us come
scathless: great would be his fame under heaven among all men, and a
goodly gift will be given him. For all the best men that bear sway by
the ships, each and all of them will give him a black ewe, with her
lamb at her foot, and ever will he be present at feasts and
clan-drinkings.”

So spake he, and thereon were they all silent, holding their peace, but
to them spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry: “Nestor, my heart and
manful spirit urge me to enter the camp of the foemen hard by, even of
the Trojans: and if some other man will follow with me, more comfort
and more courage will there be. If two go together, one before another
perceiveth a matter, how there may be gain therein; but if one alone
perceive aught, even so his wit is shorter, and weak his device.”

So spake he, and many were they that wished to follow Diomedes. The two
Aiantes were willing, men of Ares’ company, and Meriones was willing,
and right willing the son of Nestor, and the son of Atreus, Menelaos,
spearman renowned, yea and the hardy Odysseus was willing to steal into
the throng of Trojans, for always daring was his heart within him. But
among them spake the king of men, Agamemnon: “Diomedes son of Tydeus,
joy of mine heart, thy comrade verily shalt thou choose, whomsoever
thou wilt, the best of them that be here, for many are eager. But do
not thou, out of reverent heart, leave the better man behind, and give
thyself the worse companion, yielding to regard for any, and looking to
their lineage, even if one be more kingly born.”

So spake he, but was in fear for the sake of fair-haired Menelaos. But
to them again answered Diomedes of the loud war-cry: “If indeed ye bid
me choose myself a comrade, how then could I be unmindful of godlike
Odysseus, whose heart is passing eager, and his spirit so manful in all
manner of toils; and Athene loveth him. But while he cometh with me,
even out of burning fire might we both return, for he excelleth in
understanding.”

Then him again answered the steadfast noble Odysseus: “Son of Tydeus,
praise me not overmuch, neither blame me aught, for thou speakest thus
among the Argives that themselves know all. But let us be going, for
truly the night is waning, and near is the dawn, and the stars have
gone onward, and the night has advanced more than two watches, but the
third watch is yet left.”

So spake they, and harnessed them in their dread armour. To the son of
Tydeus did Thrasymedes steadfast in war give a two-edged sword (for his
own was left by his ship) and a shield, and about his head set a helm
of bull’s hide, without cone or crest, that is called a skull-cap, and
keeps the heads of stalwart youths. And Meriones gave Odysseus a bow
and a quiver, and a sword, and on his head set a helm made of leather,
and with many a thong was it stiffly wrought within, while without the
white teeth of a boar of flashing tusks were arrayed thick set on
either side, well and cunningly, and in the midst was fixed a cap of
felt.

So when these twain had harnessed them in their dread armour, they set
forth to go, and left there all the best of the host. And to them did
Pallas Athene send forth an omen on the right, a heron hard by the way,
and they beheld it not with their eyes, through the dark night, but
they heard its shrill cry. And Odysseus was glad in the omen of the
bird, and prayed to Athene: “Listen to me, thou child of aegis-bearing
Zeus, that ever in all toils dost stand by me, nor doth any motion of
mine escape thee: but now again above all be thou friendly to me,
Athene, and grant that we come back with renown to the ships, having
wrought a great work, that shall be sorrow to the Trojans.”

Next again prayed Diomedes of the loud war-cry: “Listen now likewise to
me, thou child of Zeus, unwearied maiden, and follow with me as when
with my father thou didst follow, even noble Tydeus, into Thebes, when
he went forth as a messenger from the Achaians. Even so now stand thou
by me willingly, and protect me. And to thee will I sacrifice a
yearling heifer, broad of brow, unbroken, that never yet hath man led
below the yoke. Her will I sacrifice to thee, and gild her horns with
gold.”

So spake they in their prayer, and Pallas Athene heard them. And when
they had prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus, they went forth on
their way, like two lions, through the dark night, amid the slaughter,
amid the slain men, through the arms and the black blood.

Nay, nor the stout-hearted Trojans did Hector suffer to sleep, but he
called together all the best of them, all that were chiefs and leaders
of the Trojans, them did he call together, and contrived a crafty
counsel: “Who is there that would promise and perform for me this deed,
for a great gift? yea his reward shall be sufficient. For I will give
him a chariot, and two horses of arching neck, the best that be at the
swift ships of the Achaians, to whosoever shall dare the deed, and for
himself shall win glory. And the deed is this; to go near the
swift-faring ships, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded,
as of old, or whether already, being subdued beneath our hands, the
foes are devising of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch
through the night, being fordone with dread weariness.”

So spake he, but they were all silent and held their peace. Now there
was among the Trojans one Dolon, the son of Eumedes the godlike herald,
and he was rich in gold, and rich in bronze: and verily he was ill
favoured to look upon, but swift of foot. So he spake then a word to
the Trojans and to Hector: “Hector, my heart and manful spirit urge me
to go near the swift-faring ships, and spy out all. But come, I pray
thee, hold up the staff, and swear to me, that verily thou wilt give me
the horses and the chariots bedight with bronze that bear the noble son
of Peleus. But to thee I will prove no vain spy, nor disappoint thy
hope. For I will go straight to the camp, until I may come to the ship
of Agamemnon, where surely the chiefs are like to hold council, whether
to fight or flee.”

So spake he, and Hector took the staff in his hand, and sware to him:
“Now let Zeus himself be witness, the loud-thundering lord of Hera,
that no other man of the Trojans shall mount those horses, but thou, I
declare, shalt rejoice in them for ever.”

So spake he, and sware a bootless oath thereto, and aroused Dolon to
go. And straightway he cast on his shoulders his crooked bow, and did
on thereover the skin of a grey wolf, and on his head a helm of
ferret-skin, and took a sharp javelin, and went on his way to the ships
from the host. But he was not like to come back from the ships and
bring word to Hector.

But when he had left the throng of men and horses, he went forth
eagerly on the way, and Odysseus of the seed of Zeus was ware of him as
he approached, and said unto Diomedes: “Lo, here is some man, Diomedes,
coming from the camp, I know not whether as a spy to our ships, or to
strip certain of the dead men fallen. But let us suffer him to pass by
us a little way on the plain, and thereafter may we rush on him and
take him speedily, and if it chance that he outrun us by speed of foot,
ever do thou hem him in towards the ships and away from the camp,
rushing on him with thy spear, lest in any wise he escape towards the
city.”

So they spake, and turning out of the path they lay down among the
bodies of the dead; and swiftly Dolon ran past them in his witlessness.
But when he was as far off as is the length of the furrow made by
mules, these twain ran after him, and he stood still when he heard the
sound, supposing in his heart that they were friends come from among
the Trojans to turn him back, at the countermand of Hector. But when
they were about a spear-cast off, or even less, he knew them for
foe-men, and stirred his swift limbs to fly, and speedily they started
in pursuit.

And as when two sharp-toothed hounds, well skilled in the chase, press
ever hard on a doe or a hare through a wooded land, and it runs
screaming before them, even so Tydeus’ son and Odysseus the sacker of
cities cut Dolon off from the host, and ever pursued hard after him.
But when he was just about to come among the sentinels, in his flight
towards the ships, then Athene poured strength into the son of Tydeus,
that none of the mail-clad Achaians might boast himself the first to
smite, and he come second. And strong Diomedes leaped upon him with the
spear, and said: “Stand, or I shall overtake thee with the spear, and
methinks that thou shalt not long avoid sheer destruction at my hand.”

So spake he, and threw his spear, but of his own will he missed the
man, and passing over his right shoulder the point of the polished
spear stuck fast in the ground: and Dolon stood still, in great dread
and trembling, and the teeth chattered in his mouth, and he was green
with fear. Then the twain came up with him, panting, and gripped his
hands, and weeping he spake: “Take me alive, and I will ransom myself,
for within our house there is bronze, and gold, and smithied iron,
wherefrom my father would do you grace with ransom untold, if he should
learn that I am alive among the ships of the Achaians.”

Then Odysseus of the many counsels answered him and said: “Take
courage, let not death be in thy mind, but come speak and tell me truly
all the tale, why thus from the host lost thou come all alone among the
ships, through the black night, when other mortals are sleeping? Comest
thou to strip certain of the dead men fallen, or did Hector send thee
forth to spy out everything at the hollow ships, or did thine own
spirit urge thee on?”

Then Dolon answered him, his limbs trembling beneath him: “With many a
blind hope did Hector lead my wits astray, who vowed to give me the
whole-hooved horses of the proud son of Peleus, and his car bedight
with bronze: and he bade me fare through the swift black night, and
draw nigh the foemen, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded,
as of old, or whether, already, being subdued beneath our hands, they
are devising of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch
through the night, being fordone with dread weariness.”

And smiling thereat did Odysseus of the many counsels make him answer:
“Verily now thy soul was set on great rewards, even the horses of the
wise son of Aiakos, but hard are they for mortal men to master, and
hard to drive, for any but Achilles only, whom a deathless mother bare.
But come, tell me all this truly, all the tale: where when thou camest
hither didst thou leave Hector, shepherd of the host, and where lie his
warlike gear, and where his horses? And how are disposed the watches,
and the beds of the other Trojans? And what counsel take they among
themselves; are they fain to abide there nigh the ships afar from the
city, or will they return to the city again, seeing that they have
subdued unto them the Achaiana?”

Then Dolon son of Eumedes made him answer again: “Lo, now all these
things will I recount to thee most truly. Hector with them that are
counsellors holdeth council by the barrow of godlike Ilos, apart from
the din, but as for the guards whereof thou askest, oh hero, no chosen
watch nor guard keepeth the host. As for all the watch fires of the
Trojans—on them is necessity, so that they watch and encourage each
other to keep guard; but, for the allies called from many lands, they
are sleeping and to the Trojans they leave it to keep watch, for no
wise near dwell the children and wives of the allies.” Then Odysseus of
the many counsels answered him and said: “How stands it now, do they
sleep amidst the horse-taming Trojans, or apart? tell me clearly, that
I may know.”

Then answered him Dolon son of Eumedes: “Verily all this likewise will
I recount to thee truly. Towards the sea lie the Karians, and Paionians
of the bended bow, and the Leleges and Kaukones, and noble Pelasgoi.
And towards Thymbre the Lykians have their place, and the haughty
Mysians, and the Phrygians that fight from chariots, and Maionians
lords of chariots. But wherefore do ye inquire of me throughly
concerning all these things? for if ye desire to steal into the throng
of Trojans, lo, there be those Thracians, new comers, at the furthest
point apart from the rest, and among them their king Rhesos, son of
Eioneus. His be the fairest horses that ever I beheld, and the
greatest, whiter than snow, and for speed like the winds. And his
chariot is fashioned well with gold and silver, and golden is his
armour that he brought with him, marvellous, a wonder to behold; such
as it is in no wise fit for mortal men to bear, but for the deathless
gods. But bring me now to the swift ships, or leave me here, when ye
have bound me with a ruthless bond, that ye may go and make trial of me
whether I have spoken to you truth, or lies.”

Then strong Diomedes, looking grimly on him, said: “Put no thought of
escape, Dolon, in thy heart, for all the good tidings thou hast
brought, since once thou halt come into our hands. For if now we
release thee or let thee go, on some later day wilt thou come to the
swift ships of the Achaians, either to play the spy, or to fight in
open war, but if subdued beneath my hands thou lose thy life, never
again wilt thou prove a bane to the Argives.”

He spake, and that other with strong hand was about to touch his chin,
and implore his mercy, but Diomedes smote him on the midst of the neck,
rushing on him with the sword, and cut through both the sinews, and the
head of him still speaking was mingled with the dust. And they stripped
him of the casque of ferret’s skin from off his head, and of his
wolf-skin, and his bended bow, and his long spear, and these to Athene
the Giver of Spoil did noble Odysseus hold aloft in his hand, and he
prayed and spake a word: “Rejoice, O goddess, in these, for to thee
first of all the immortals in Olympus will we call for aid; nay, but
yet again send us on against the horses and the sleeping places of the
Thracian men.”

So spake he aloud, and lifted from him the spoils on high, and set them
on a tamarisk bush, and raised thereon a mark right plain to see,
gathering together reeds, and luxuriant shoots of tamarisk, lest they
should miss the place as they returned again through the swift dark
night.

So the twain went forward through the arms, and the black blood, and
quickly they came to the company of Thracian men. Now they were
slumbering, fordone with toil, but their goodly weapons lay by them on
the ground, all orderly, in three rows, and by each man his pair of
steeds. And Rhesos slept in the midst, and beside him his swift horses
were bound with thongs to the topmost rim of the chariot. Him Odysseus
spied from afar, and showed him unto Diomedes: “Lo, Diomedes, this is
the man, and these are the horses whereof Dolon that we slew did give
us tidings. But come now, put forth thy great strength; it doth not
behove thee to stand idle with thy weapons: nay, loose the horses; or
do thou slay the men, and of the horses will I take heed.”

So spake he, and into that other bright-eyed Athene breathed might, and
he began slaying on this side and on that, and hideously went up their
groaning, as they were smitten with the sword, and the earth was
reddened with blood. And like as a lion cometh on flocks without a
herdsman, on goats or sheep, and leaps upon them with evil will, so set
the son of Tydeus on the men of Thrace, till he had slain twelve. But
whomsoever the son of Tydeus drew near and smote with the sword, him
did Odysseus of the many counsels seize by the foot from behind, and
drag him out of the way, with this design in his heart, that the
fair-maned horses might lightly issue forth, and not tremble in spirit,
when they trod over the dead; for they were not yet used to dead men.
But when the son of Tydeus came upon the king, he was the thirteenth
from whom he took sweet life away, as he was breathing hard, for an
evil dream stood above his head that night through the device of
Athens. Meanwhile the hardy Odysseus loosed the whole-hooved horses,
and bound them together with thongs, and drave them out of the press,
smiting them with his bow, since he had not taken thought to lift the
shining whip with his hands from the chariot; then he whistled for a
sign to noble Diomedes.

But Diomedes stood and pondered what most daring deed he might do,
whether he should take the chariot, where lay the armour, and drag it
out by the pole, or lift it upon high, and so bear it forth, or whether
he should take the life away from yet more of the Thracians. And while
he was pondering this in his heart, then Athene drew near, and stood,
and spake to noble Diomedes: “Bethink thee of returning, O son of
great-hearted Tydeus, to the hollow ships, lest perchance thou come
thither in flight, and perchance another god rouse up the Trojans
likewise.”

So spake she, and he observed the voice of the utterance of the
goddess, and swiftly he sprang upon the steeds, and Odysseus smote them
with his bow, and they sped to the swift ships of the Achaians.

Nay, nor a vain watch kept Apollo of the silver bow, when he beheld
Athene caring for the son of Tydeus; in wrath against her he stole
among the crowded press of Trojans, and aroused a counsellor of the
Thracians, Hippokoon, the noble kinsman of Rhesos. And he started out
of sleep, when he beheld the place desolate where the swift horses had
stood, and beheld the men gasping in the death struggle; then he
groaned aloud, and called out by name to his comrade dear. And a
clamour arose and din unspeakable of the Trojans hasting together, and
they marvelled at the terrible deeds, even all that the heroes had
wrought, and had gone thereafter to the hollow ships.

But when those others came to the place where they had slain the spy of
Hector, there Odysseus, dear to Zeus, checked the swift horses, and
Tydeus’ son, leaping to the ground, set the bloody spoil in the hands
of Odysseus, and again mounted, and lashed the horses, and they sped
onward nothing loth. But Nestor first heard the sound, and said: “O
friends, leaders and counsellors of the Argives, shall I be wrong or
speak sooth? for my heart bids me speak. The sound of swift-footed
horses strikes upon mine ears. Would to god that Odysseus and that
strong Diomedes may even instantly be driving the whole-hooved horses
from among the Trojans; but terribly I fear in mine heart lest the
bravest of the Argives suffer aught through the Trojans’ battle din.”

Not yet was his whole word spoken, when they came themselves, and
leaped down to earth, but gladly the others welcomed them with
hand-clasping, and with honeyed words. And first did knightly Nestor of
Gerenia make question: “Come, tell me now, renowned Odysseus, great
glory of the Achaians, how ye twain took those horses? Was it by
stealing into the press of Trojans? Or did some god meet you, and give
you them? Wondrous like are they to rays of the sun. Ever with the
Trojans do I mix in fight, nor methinks do I tarry by the ships, old
warrior as I am. But never yet saw I such horses, nor deemed of such.
Nay, methinks some god must have encountered you and given you these.
For both of you doth Zeus the cloud-gatherer love, and the maiden of
aegis-bearing Zeus, bright-eyed Athene.”

And him answered Odysseus of the many counsels: “O Nestor, son of
Neleus, great glory of the Achaians, lightly could a god, if so he
would, give even better steeds than these, for the gods are far
stronger than we. But as for these new-come horses, whereof, old man,
thou askest me, they are Thracian, but their lord did brave Diomedes
slay, and beside him all the twelve best men of his company. The
thirteenth man was a spy we took near the ships, one that Hector and
the other haughty Trojans sent forth to pry upon our camp.”

So spake he, and drave the whole-hooved horses through the foss,
laughing; and the other Achaians went with him joyfully. But when they
had come to the well-built hut of the son of Tydeus, they bound the
horses with well-cut thongs, at the mangers where the swift horses of
Diomedes stood eating honey-sweet barley.

And Odysseus placed the bloody spoils of Dolon in the stern of the
ship, that they might make ready a sacred offering to Athene. But for
themselves, they went into the sea, and washed off the thick sweat from
shins, and neck, and thighs. But when the wave of the sea had washed
the thick sweat from their skin, and their hearts revived again, they
went into polished baths, and were cleansed.

And when they had washed, and anointed them with olive oil, they sat
down at supper, and from the full mixing bowl they drew off the
honey-sweet wine, and poured it forth to Athene.



BOOK XI.

Despite the glorious deeds of Agamemnon, the Trojans press hard on the
Achaians, and the beginning of evil comes on Patroklos.


Now Dawn arose from her couch beside proud Tithonos, to bring light to
the immortals and to mortal men. But Zeus sent forth fierce Discord
unto the fleet ships of the Achaians, and in her hands she held the
signal of war. And she stood upon the huge black ship of Odysseus, that
was in the midst, to make her voice heard on either side, both to the
huts of Aias, son of Telamon, and to the huts of Achilles, for these
twain, trusting in their valour and the might of their hands, had drawn
up their trim ships at the two ends of the line. There stood the
goddess and cried shrilly in a great voice and terrible, and mighty
strength she set in the heart of each of the Achaians, to war and fight
unceasingly. And straightway to them war grew sweeter than to depart in
the hollow ships to their dear native land.

Then each man gave in charge his horses to his charioteer, to hold them
in by the foss, well and orderly, and themselves as heavy men at arms
were hasting about, being harnessed in their gear, and unquenchable the
cry arose into the Dawn. And long before the charioteers were they
arrayed at the foss, but after them a little way came up the drivers.
And among them the son of Kronos aroused an evil din, and from above
rained down dew danked with blood out of the upper air, for that he was
about to send many strong men down to Hades.

But the Trojans on the other side, on the high ground of the plain,
gathered them around great Hector, and noble Polydamus, and Aineias
that as a god was honoured by the people of the Trojans, and the three
sons of Antenor, Polybos, and noble Agenor, and young Akamas like unto
the immortals. And Hector in the foremost rank bare the circle of his
shield. And as from amid the clouds appeareth glittering a baneful
star, and then again sinketh within the shadowy clouds, even so Hector
would now appear among the foremost ranks, and again would be giving
command in the rear, and all in bronze he shone, like the lightning of
aegis-bearing father Zeus.

And even as when reapers over against each other drive their swaths
through a rich mal’s field of wheat or barley, and thick fall the
handfuls, even so the Trojans and Achaians leaped upon each other,
destroying, and neither side took thought of ruinous flight; and equal
heads had the battle, and they rushed on like wolves. And woful Discord
was glad at the sight, for she alone of the gods was with them in the
war; for the other gods were not beside them, but in peace they sat
within their halls, where the goodly mansion of each was builded in the
folds of Olympus. And they all were blaming the son of Kronos, lord of
the storm-cloud, for that he willed to give glory to the Trojans. But
of them took the father no heed, but aloof from the others he sat
apart, glad in his glory, looking toward the city of the Trojans, and
the ships of the Achaians, and the glitter of bronze, and the slayers
and the slain.

So long as morning was, and the sacred day still waxed, so long did the
shafts of both hosts strike, and the folk fell, but about the hour when
a woodman maketh ready his meal, in the dells of a mountain, when he
hath tired his hands with felling tall trees, and weariness cometh on
his soul, and desire of sweet food taketh his heart, even then the
Danaans by their valour brake the battalions, and called on their
comrades through the lines. And in rushed Agamemnon first of all, where
thickest clashed the battalions, there he set on, and with him all the
well-greaved Achaians. Footmen kept slaying footmen as they were driven
in flight, and horsemen slaying horsemen with the sword, and from
beneath them rose up the dust from the plain, stirred by the thundering
hooves of horses. And the lord Agamemnon, ever slaying, followed after,
calling on the Argives. And as when ruinous fire falleth on dense
woodland, and the whirling wind beareth it everywhere, and the thickets
fall utterly before it, being smitten by the onset of the fire, even so
beneath Agamemnon son of Atreus fell the heads of the Trojans as they
fled; and many strong-necked horses rattled empty cars along the
highways of the battle, lacking their noble charioteers; but they on
the earth were lying, far more dear to the vultures than to their
wives. But Hector did Zeus draw forth from the darts and the dust, from
the man-slaying, and the blood, and the din, and the son of Atreus
followed on, crying eagerly to the Danaans. And past the tomb of
ancient Ilos, son of Dardanos, across the mid plain, past the place of
the wild fig-tree they sped, making for the city, and ever the son of
Atreus followed shouting, and his invincible hands were defiled with
gore. But when they were come to the Skaian gates, and the oak-tree,
there then they halted, and awaited each other. But some were still in
full flight through the mid plain, like kine that a lion hath
scattered, coming on them in the dead of night; all hath he scattered,
but to one sheer death appeareth instantly, and he breaketh her neck
first, seizing her with strong teeth, and thereafter swalloweth
greedily the blood and all the guts; even so lord Agamemnon son of
Atreus followed hard on the Trojans, ever slaying the hindmost man, and
they were scattered in flight, and on face or back many of them fell
from their chariots beneath the hands of Agamemnon, for mightily he
raged with the spear. But when he was nowabout coming below the city,
and the steep wall, then did the father of men and gods sit him down on
the crests of many-fountained Ida, from heaven descending, with the
thunderbolt in his hands.

Then sent he forth Iris of the golden wings, to bear his word: “Up and
go, swift Iris, and tell this word unto Hector: So long as he sees
Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, raging among the foremost fighters,
and ruining the ranks of men, so long let him hold back, but bid the
rest of the host war with the foe in strong battle. But when, or
smitten with the spear or wounded with arrow shot, Agamemnon leapeth
into his chariot, then will I give Hector strength to slay till he come
even to the well-timbered ships, and the sun go down, and sacred
darkness draw on.”

So swift-footed Iris spake to Hector the words of Zeus and departed,
but Hector with his harness leaped from the chariot to the ground, and,
shaking his sharp spears went through all the host, stirring up his men
to fight, and he roused the dread din of battle. And they wheeled
round, and stood and faced the Achaians, while the Argives on the other
side strengthened their battalions. And battle was made ready, and they
stood over against each other, and Agamemnon first rushed in, being
eager to fight far in front of all.

Tell me now, ye Muses that inhabit mansions in Olympus, who was he that
first encountered Agamemnon, whether of the Trojans themselves, or of
their allies renowned? It was Iphidamas, son of Antenor, great and
mighty, who was nurtured in Thrace rich of soil, the mother of sheep;
he it was that then encountered Agamemnon son of Atreus. And when they
were come near in onset against each other, Atreus’ son missed, and his
spear was turned aside, but Iphidamas smote him on the girdle, below
the corslet, and himself pressed on, trusting to his heavy hand, but
pierced not the gleaming girdle, for long ere that the point struck on
the silver, and was bent like lead. Then wide-ruling Agamemnon caught
the spear with his hand and drew it toward him furiously, like a lion,
and snatched it out of the hand of Iphidamas, and smote his neck with
the sword, and unstrung his limbs. So even there he fell, and slept a
sleep of bronze most piteously. Then did Agamemnon son of Atreus strip
him, and went bearing his goodly harness into the throng of the
Achaians.

Now when Koon beheld him, Koon Antenor’s eldest son, illustrious among
men, strong sorrow came on him, covering his eyes, for his brother’s
fall: and he stood on one side with his spear, and unmarked of noble
Agamemnon smote him on the mid-arm, beneath the elbow, and clean
through went the point of the shining spear. Then Agamemnon king of men
shuddered, yet not even so did he cease from battle and war, but rushed
against Koon, grasping his wind-nurtured spear. Verily then Koon seized
right lustily by the foot Iphidamas, his brother, and his father’s son,
and called to all the best of his men; but him, as he dragged the dead
through the press, beneath his bossy shield Agamemnon wounded with a
bronze-shod spear, and unstrung his limbs, and drew near and cut off
his head over Iphidamas. There the sons of Antenor, at the hands of
Agamemnon the king, filled up the measure of their fate, and went down
within the house of Hades.

But Agamemnon ranged among the ranks of men, with spear, and sword, and
great stones for throwing, while yet the blood welled warm from his
wound. But when the wound waxed dry, and the blood ceased to flow, then
keen pangs came on the might of the son of Atreus. Then leaped he into
his chariot, and bade his charioteer drive to the hollow ships, for he
was sore vexed at heart. And he called in a piercing voice, and shouted
to the Danaans: “O friends, leaders and counsellors of the Argives, do
ye now ward from the seafaring ships the harsh din of battle, for Zeus
the counsellor suffers me not all day to war with the Trojans.”

So spake he, and his charioteer lashed the fair-maned steeds toward the
hollow ships, and they flew onward nothing loth, and their breasts were
covered with foam, and their bellies were stained with dust, as they
bore the wounded king away from the war.

But Hector, when he beheld Agamemnon departed, cried to the Trojans and
Lykians with a loud shout: “Ye Trojans and Lykians, and Dardanians that
war in close fight, be men, my friends, and be mindful of your
impetuous valour. The best man of them hath departed and to me hath
Zeus, the son of Kronos, given great renown. But straightway drive ye
the whole-hooved horses against the mighty Danaans, that ye may be the
masters and bear away the higher glory.”

So spake he, and aroused the might and spirit of every man. Himself
with high thoughts he fared among the foremost, and fell upon the
fight; like a roaring blast, that leapeth down and stirreth the
violet-coloured deep. There whom first, whom last did he slay, even
Hector, son of Priam, when Zeus vouchsafed him renown?

Asaios first, and Autonoos, and Opites, and Dolops, son of Klytios, and
Opheltios, and Agelaos, and Aisymnos, and Oros, and Hipponoos steadfast
in the fight; these leaders of the Danaans he slew, and thereafter
smote the multitude, even as when the West Wind driveth the clouds of
the white South Wind, smiting with deep storm, and the wave swelleth
huge, rolling onward, and the spray is scattered on high beneath the
rush of the wandering wind; even so many heads of the host were smitten
by Hector.

There had ruin begun, and deeds remedeless been wrought, and now would
all the Achaians have fled and fallen among the ships, if Odysseus had
not called to Diomedes, son of Tydeus: “Tydeus’ son, what ails us that
we forget our impetuous valour? Nay, come hither, friend, and take thy
stand by me, for verily it will be shame if Hector of the glancing helm
take the ships.”

And to him strong Diomedes spake in answer: “Verily will I abide and
endure, but short will be all our profit, for Zeus, the cloud-gatherer,
clearly desireth to give victory to the Trojans rather than to us.”

He spake, and drave Thymbraios from his chariot to the ground, smiting
him with the spear in the left breast, and Odysseus smote Molion the
godlike squire of that prince. These then they let be, when they had
made them cease from war, and then the twain fared through the crowd
with a din, as when two boars full of valour fall on the hunting
hounds; so rushed they on again, and slew the Trojans, while gladly the
Achaians took breath again in their flight from noble Hector.

But Hector quickly spied them among the ranks, and rushed upon them
shouting, and with him followed the battalions of the Trojans. And
beholding him, Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered, and straightway
spake to Odysseus that was hard by: “Lo, on us this ruin, even mighty
Hector, is rolling: let us stand, and await him, and ward off his
onset.”

So spake he, and swayed and sent forth his far-shadowing spear, and
smote him nor missed, for he aimed at the head, on the summit of the
crest, and bronze by bronze was turned, nor reached his fair flesh, for
it was stopped by the threefold helm with its socket, that Phoebus
Apollo to Hector gave. But Hector sprang back a wondrous way, and
mingled with the throng, and he rested, fallen on his knee, and leaned
on the ground with his stout hand, and dark night veiled his eyes.

But while Tydeus’ son was following after his spear-cast, far through
the foremost fighters, where he saw it sink into the earth, Hector gat
breath again, and leaping back into his chariot drave out into the
throng, and avoided black Fate. Then rushing on with his spear mighty
Diomedes spake to him: “Dog, thou art now again escaped from death; yet
came ill very nigh thee: but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to
whom thou must surely pray when thou goest amid the clash of spears.
Verily I will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any god is
helper of me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I may
seize.”

So spake he, and stripped the son of Paeon, spearman renowned. But
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, aimed with his arrows at
Tydeides, shepherd of the host; leaning as he aimed against a pillar on
the barrow, by men fashioned, of Ilos, son of Dardanos, an elder of the
people in time gone by. Now Diomedes was stripping the shining corslet
of strong Agastrophos from about his breast, and the shield from his
shoulders, and his strong helmet, when Paris drew the centre of his
bow; nor vainly did the shaft fly from his hand, for he smote the flat
of the right foot of Diomedes, and the arrow went clean through, and
stood fixed in the earth; and right sweetly laughing Paris leaped up
from his lair, and boasted, and said: “Thou art smitten, nor vainly
hath the dart flown forth; would that I had smitten thee in the nether
belly, and taken thy life away. So should the Trojans have breathed
again from their trouble, they that shudder at thee, as bleating goats
at a lion.”

But him answered strong Diomedes, no wise dismayed: “Bowman, reviler,
proud in thy bow of horn, thou gaper after girls, verily if thou madest
trial in full harness, man to man, thy bow and showers of shafts would
nothing avail thee, but now thou boastest vainly, for that thou hast
grazed the sole of my foot. I care not, more than if a woman had struck
me or a senseless boy, for feeble is the dart of a craven man and a
worthless. In other wise from my hand, yea, if it do but touch, the
sharp shaft flieth, and straightway layeth low its man, and torn are
the cheeks of his wife, and fatherless his children, and he, reddening
the earth with his blood, doth rot away, more birds than women round
him.”

So spake he, and Odysseus, spearman renowned, drew near, and stood in
front of him, and Diomedes sat down behind him, and drew the sharp
arrow from his foot, and a sore pang passed through his flesh. Then
sprang he into his car, and bade his charioteer drive back to the
hollow ships, for he was hurt at heart. Then Odysseus, spearman
renowned, was left alone, nor did one of the Argives abide by him, for
fear had fallen on them all. Then in heaviness he spoke to his own
great-hearted spirit: “Ah me, what thing shall befall me! A great evil
it is if I flee, in dread of the throng; yet worse is this, if I be
taken all alone, for the other Danaans bath Kronion scattered in
flight. But wherefore doth my heart thus converse with herself? for I
know that they are cowards, who flee the fight, but whosoever is a hero
in war, him it mainly behoves to stand stubbornly, whether he be
smitten, or whether he smite another.”

While he pondered thus in heart and spirit, the ranks came on of the
Trojans under shield, and hemmed him in the midst, setting among them
their own bane. And even as when hounds and young men in their bloom
press round a boar, and he cometh forth from his deep lair, whetting
his white tusk between crooked jaws, and round him they rush, and the
sound of the gnashing of tusks ariseth, and straightway they await his
assault, so dread as he is, even so then round Odysseus, dear to Zeus,
rushed the Trojans. And first he wounded noble Deiopites, from above,
in the shoulder, leaping on him with sharp spear, and next he slew
Thoon and Ennomos, and next Chersidamas, being leapt down from his
chariot, he smote with the spear on the navel beneath the bossy shield,
and he fell in the dust and clutched the ground with the hollow of his
hand. These left he, and wounded Charops, son of Hippasos, with the
spear, the brother of high-born Sokos. And to help him came Sokos, a
godlike man, and stood hard by him, and spake saying: “O renowned
Odysseus, insatiable of craft and toil, to-day shalt thou either boast
over two sons of Hippasos, as having slain two such men of might, and
stripped their harness, or smitten by my spear shaft lose thy life.”

So spake he, and smote him on the circle of his shield; through the
shining shield passed the strong spear, and through the fair-dight
corslet it was thrust, and tore clean off the flesh of the flanks, but
Pallas Athens did not suffer it to mingle with the bowels of the hero,
and Odysseus knew that the dart had in nowise lighted on a deadly spot,
and drawing backward, he spake unto Sokos “Ah, wretched one, verily
sheer destruction is come upon thee. Surely thou hast made me to cease
from warring among the Trojans, but here to thee I declare that slaying
and black Fate will be upon thee this day, and beneath my spear
overthrown shalt thou give glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the
noble steeds.”

He spake, and the other turned, and started to flee, and in his back as
he turned he fixed the spear, between the shoulders, and drave it
through the breast. Then he fell with a crash, and noble Odysseus
boasted over him: “Ah, Sokos, son of wise-hearted Hippasos the tamer of
horses, the end of death hath come upon and caught thee, nor hast thou
avoided. Ah, wretch, thy father and lady mother shall not close thine
eyes in death, but birds that eat flesh raw shall tear thee, shrouding
thee in the multitude of their wings. But to me, if I die, the noble
Achaians will yet give due burial.”

So spake he, and drew the mighty spear of wise-hearted Sokos forth from
his flesh, and from his bossy shield, and his blood flowed forth when
the spear was drawn away, and afflicted his spirit. And the
great-hearted Trojans when they beheld the blood of Odysseus, with
clamour through the throng came all together against him. But he gave
ground, and shouted unto his comrades: thrice he shouted then, as loud
as mal’s mouth might cry, and thrice did Menelaos dear to Zeus hear his
call, and quickly he spake to Aias that was hard by him: “Aias, of the
seed of Zeus, child of Telamon, lord of the hosts, the shout of
Odysseus of the hardy heart rings round me, like as though the Trojans
were oppressing him alone among them, and had cut him off in the strong
battle. Nay, let us speed into the throng, for better it is to rescue
him. I fear lest he suffer some evil, being alone among the Trojans, so
brave as he is, and lest great sorrow for his loss come upon the
Danaans.”

So spake he, and led the way, and the other followed him, a godlike
man. Then found they Odysseus dear to Zeus, and the Trojans beset him
like tawny jackals from the hills round a wounded horned stag, that a
man hath smitten with an arrow from the bow-string, and the stag hath
fled from him by speed of foot, as long as the blood is warm and his
limbs are strong, but when the swift arrow hath overcome him, then do
the ravening jackals rend him in the hills, in a dark wood, and then
god leadeth a murderous lion thither, and the jackals flee before him,
but he rendeth them, so then, round wise-hearted Odysseus of the crafty
counsels, did the Trojans gather, many and mighty, but that hero
thrusting on with the spear held off the pitiless day. Then Aias drew
near, bearing his shield like a tower, and stood thereby, and the
Trojans fled from him, where each man might. Then warlike Menelaos led
Odysseus out of the press, holding him by the hand, till the squire
drave up the horses.

Then Aias leaped on the Trojans, and slew Doyrklos, bastard son of
Priam, and thereafter wounded he Pandokos, and he wounded Lysandros,
and Pyrasos, and Pylartes. And as when a brimming river cometh down
upon the plain, in winter flood from the hills, swollen by the rain of
Zeus, and many dry oaks and many pines it sucketh in, and much soil it
casteth into the sea, even so renowned Aias charged them, pursuing
through the plain, slaying horses and men. Nor wist Hector thereof at
all, for he was fighting on the left of all the battle, by the banks of
the river Skamandros, whereby chiefly fell the heads of men, and an
unquenchable cry arose, around great Nestor and warlike Idomeneus. And
Hector with them was warring, and terrible things did he, with the
spear and in horsemanship, and he ravaged the battalions of the young
men. Nor would the noble Achaians have yet given ground from the path,
if Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, had not stayed Machaon
shepherd of the host in his valorous deeds, and smitten him on the
right shoulder with a three-barbed arrow. Therefore were the Achaians,
breathing valour, in great fear, lest men should seize Machaon in the
turning of the fight.

Then Idomeneus spake to noble Nestor: “O Nestor, son of Neleus, great
glory of the Achaians, arise, get thee up into thy chariot, and with
thee let Machaon go, and swiftly drive to the ships the whole-hooved
horses. For a leech is worth many other men, to cut out arrows, and
spread soothing medicaments.”

So spake he, nor did knightly Nestor of Gerenia disobey him, but
straightway gat up into his chariot, and with him went Machaon, son of
Asklepios the good leech, and he lashed the horses, and willingly flew
they forward to the hollow ships, where they desired to be.

But Kebriones, the charioteer of Hector, beheld the Trojans driven in
flight, and spake to him, and said: “Hector, here do we contend with
the Danaans, at the limit of the wailful war, but, lo, the other
Trojans are driven in flight confusedly, men and horses. And Aias son
of Telamon is driving them; well I know him, for wide is the shield
round his shoulders. Nay, let us too urge thither the horses and
chariot, there where horsemen and footmen thickest in the forefront of
evil strife are slaying each other, and the cry goes up unquenchable.”

So spake he, and smote the fair-maned horses with the shrill-sounding
whip, and they felt the lash, and fleetly bore the swift chariot among
the Trojans and Achaians, treading on the dead, and the shields, and
with blood was sprinkled all the axle-tree beneath, and the rims round
the car with the drops from the hooves of the horses, and with drops
from the tires about the wheels. And Hector was eager to enter the
press of men, and to leap in and break through, and evil din of battle
he brought among the Danaans, and brief space rested he from smiting
with the spear. Nay, but he ranged among the ranks of other men, with
spear, and sword, and with great stones, but he avoided the battle of
Aias son of Telamon.

Now father Zeus, throned in the highest, roused dread in Aias, and he
stood in amaze, and cast behind him his sevenfold shield of bull’s
hide, and gazed round in fear upon the throng, like a wild beast,
turning this way and that, and slowly retreating step by step. And as
when hounds and country folk drive a tawny lion from the mid-fold of
the kine, and suffer him not to carry away the fattest of the herd; all
night they watch, and he in great desire for the flesh maketh his
onset, but takes nothing thereby, for thick the darts fly from strong
hands against him, and the burning brands, and these he dreads for all
his fury, and in the dawn he departeth with vexed heart; even so at
that time departed Aias, vexed at heart, from among the Trojans, right
unwillingly, for he feared sore for the ships of the Achaians. And as
when a lazy ass going past a field hath the better of the boys with
him, an ass that hath had many a cudgel broken about his sides, and he
fareth into the deep crop, and wasteth it, while the boys smite him
with cudgels, and feeble is the force of them, but yet with might and
main they drive him forth, when he hath had his fill of fodder, even so
did the high-hearted Trojans and allies, called from many lands, smite
great Aias, son of Telamon, with darts on the centre of his shield, and
ever followed after him. And Aias would now be mindful of his impetuous
valour, and turn again, and hold at bay the battalions of the
horse-taming Trojans, and once more he would turn him again to flee.
Yet he hindered them all from making their way to the fleet ships, and
himself stood and smote between the Trojans and the Achaians, and the
spears from strong hands stuck some of them in his great shield, fain
to win further, and many or ever they reached his white body stood fast
halfway in the earth, right eager to sate themselves with his flesh.

So they fought like unto burning fire.

But the mares of Neleus all sweating bare Nestor out of the battle, and
also carried they Machaon, shepherd of the host. Then the noble
Achilles, swift of foot, beheld and was ware of him, for Achilles was
standing by the stern of his great ship, watching the dire toil, and
the woful rout of battle. And straightway he spake to his own comrade,
Patroklos, calling to him from beside the ship, and he heard, and from
the hut he came, like unto Ares; and this to him was the beginning of
evil. Then the strong son of Menoitios spake first to Achilles: “Why
dost thou call me, Achilles, what need hast thou of me?”

Then swift-footed Achilles answered him and spake: “Noble son of
Menoitios, dear to my heart, now methinks that the Achaians will stand
in prayer about my knees, for need no longer tolerable cometh upon
them. But go now, Patroklos dear to Zeus, and ask Nestor who is this
that he bringeth wounded from the war. Verily from behind he is most
like Machaon, that child of Asklepios, but I beheld not the eyes of the
man, for the horses sped past me, straining forward eagerly.”

So spake he and Patroklos obeyed his dear comrade, and started and ran
past the ships, and the huts of the Achaians.

Now when they came to the hut of the son of Neleus, they lighted down
on the bounteous earth, and the squire, Eurymedon, loosed the horses of
that old man from the car, and they dried the sweat from their
doublets, standing before the breeze, by the shore of the sea, and
thereafter came they to the hut, and sat them down on chairs. And
fair-tressed Hekamede mixed for them a mess, Hekamede that the old man
won from Tenedos, when Achilles sacked it, and she was the daughter of
great-hearted Arsinoos, and her the Achaians chose out for him, because
always in counsel he excelled them all. First she drew before them a
fair table, polished well, with feet of cyanus, and thereon a vessel of
bronze, with onion, for relish to the drink, and pale honey, and the
grain of sacred barley, and beside it a right goodly cup, that the old
man brought from home, embossed with studs of gold, and four handles
there were to it, and round each two golden doves were feeding, and to
the cup were two feet below. Another man could scarce have lifted the
cup from the table, when it was full, but Nestor the Old raised it
easily. In this cup the woman, like unto the goddesses, mixed a mess
for them, with Pramnian wine, and therein grated cheese of goats’ milk,
with a grater of bronze, and scattered white barley thereover, and bade
them drink, whenas she had made ready the mess.

So when the twain had drunk, and driven away parching thirst, they took
their pleasure in discourse, speaking each to the other. Now Patroklos
stood at the doors, a godlike man, and when the old man beheld him, he
arose from his shining chair, and took him by the hand, and led him in,
and bade him be seated. But Patroklos, from over against him, was for
refusing, and spake and said: “No time to sit have I, old man,
fosterling of Zeus, nor wilt thou persuade me. Revered and dreaded is
he that sent me forth to ask thee who this man is that thou bringest
home wounded. Nay, but I know myself, for I see Machaon, shepherd of
the host. And now will I go back again, a messenger, to speak a word to
Achilles. And well dost thou know, old man, fosterling of Zeus, how
terrible a man he is; lightly would he blame even one that is
blameless.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him again: “Wherefore is
Achilles thus sorry for the sons of the Achaians, for as many as are
wounded with darts? He knoweth not at all what grief hath arisen in the
camp: for the best men lie in the ships, wounded by shaft or smitten by
spear. Wounded with the shaft is strong Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and
smitten is Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon, and this other
have I but newly carried out of battle, wounded with an arrow from the
bowstring. But Achilles, for all his valiance, careth not for the
Danaans, nor pities them at all. Doth he wait till the fleet ships hard
by the shore shall burn in the consuming fire, and till we be slain one
upon another? Nay, but even now speak thou thus and thus to
wise-hearted Achilles, if perchance he will obey thee. Who knows but
that, God helping, thou mightst stir his spirit with thy persuading?
and good is the persuasion of a friend. But if in his heart he be
shunning some oracle of God, and his lady mother hath told him somewhat
from Zeus, natheless let him send forth thee, and let the rest of the
host of the Myrmidons follow with thee, if perchance any light shall
arise from thee to the Danaans; and let him give thee his fair harness,
to bear into the war, if perchance the Trojans may take thee for him,
and withhold them from the strife, and the warlike sons of the Achaians
might take breath, being wearied; for brief is the breathing time in
battle. And lightly might ye, being unwearied, drive men wearied in the
war unto the city, away from the ships and the huts.”

So spake he, and roused his heart within his breast, and he started and
ran by the ships to Achilles of the seed of Aiakos.



BOOK XII.

How the Trojans and allies broke within the wall of the Achaians.


So in the huts the strong son of Menortios was tending the wounded
Eurypylos, but still they fought confusedly, the Argives and Trojans.
Nor were the fosse of the Danaans and their wide wall above long to
protect them, the wall they had builded for defence of the ships, and
the fosse they had drawn round about; for neither had they given goodly
hecatombs to the gods, that it might guard with its bounds their swift
ships and rich spoil. Nay, maugre the deathless gods was it builded,
wherefore it abode steadfast for no long time. While Hector yet lived,
and yet Achilles kept his wrath, and unsacked was the city of Priam the
king, so long the great wall of the Achaians likewise abode steadfast.
But when all the bravest of the Trojans died, and many of the
Argives,—some were taken, and some were left,—and the city of Priam was
sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back in their ships
to their own dear country, then verily did Poseidon and Apollo take
counsel to wash away the wall, bringing in the might of the rivers, of
all that flow from the hills of Ida to the sea. Rhesos there was, and
Heptaporos, and Karesos, and Rhodios, Grenikos, and Aisepos, and goodly
Skamandros, and Simoeis, whereby many shields and helms fell in the
dust, and the generation of men half divine; the mouths of all these
waters did Phoebus Apollo turn together, and for nine days he drave
their stream against the wall; and still Zeus rained unceasingly, that
the quicker he might mingle the wall with the salt sea. And the Shaker
of the earth, with his trident in his hands, was himself the leader,
and sent forth into the waves all the foundations of beams and stones
that the Achaians had laid with toil, and made all smooth by the strong
current of the Hellespont, and covered again the great beach with sand,
when he had swept away the wall, and turned the rivers back to flow in
their channel, where of old they poured down their fair flow of water.

So were Poseidon and Apollo to do in the aftertime; but then war and
the din of war sounded about the well-builded wall, and the beams of
the towers rang beneath the strokes; while the Argives, subdued by the
scourge of Zeus, were penned and driven in by the hollow ships, in
dread of Hector, the mighty maker of flight, but he, as aforetime,
fought like a whirlwind. And as when, among hounds and hunting men, a
boar or lion wheeleth him about, raging in his strength, and these
array themselves in fashion like a tower, and stand up against him,
casting many javelins from their hands; but never is his stout heart
confused nor afraid, and his courage is his bane, and often he wheeleth
him about, and maketh trial of the ranks of men, and wheresoever he
maketh onset there the ranks of men give way, even so Hector went and
besought his comrades through the press, and spurred them on to cross
the dyke. But his swift-footed horses dared not, but loud they neighed,
standing by the sheer edge, for the wide fosse affrighted them, neither
easy to leap from hard by, nor to cross, for overhanging banks stood
round about it all on either hand, and above it was furnished with
sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaians had planted there, thick set
and great, a bulwark against hostile men. Thereby not lightly might a
horse enter, drawing a well-wheeled chariot; but the footmen were
eager, if they might accomplish it. Then Polydamas drew near valiant
Hector, and spake to him: “Hector and ye other leaders of the Trojans
and allies, foolishly do we drive our fleet horses through the dyke;
nay right hard it is to cross, for sharp stakes stand in it, and over
against them the wall of the Achaians. Thereby none may go down and
fight in chariots, for strait is the place wherein, methinks, we might
come by a mischief. For if Zeus that thunders on high is utterly to
destroy them in his evil will, and is minded to help the Trojans,
verily then I too would desire that even instantly this might be, that
the Achaians should perish here nameless far from Argos: but and if
they turn again, and we flee back from among the ships, and rush into
the delved ditch, then methinks that not even one from among us to bear
the tidings will win back to the city before the force of the Achaians
when they rally. But come as I declare, let us all obey. Let our
squires hold the horses by the dyke, while we being harnessed in our
gear as foot soldiers follow all together with Hector, and the Achaians
will not withstand us, if indeed the bands of death be made fast upon
them.”

So spake Polydamas, and his wise word pleased Hector well, and
straightway in his harness he leaped from his chariot to the ground.
Nor were the other Trojans gathered upon the chariots, but they all
leaped forth, when they beheld goodly Hector. There each gave it into
the charge of his own charioteer, to keep the horses orderly there by
the fosse. And they divided, and arrayed themselves, and ordered in
five companies they followed with the leaders.

Now they that went with Hector and noble Polydamas, these were most,
and bravest, and most were eager to break the wall, and fight by the
hollow ships; and with them followed Kebriones for the third, for
Hector had left another man with his chariot, a weaker warrior than
Kebriones. The second company Paris led, and Alkathoos, and Agenor: and
the third company Helenos led, and godlike Deiphobos,—two sons of
Priam,—the third was the warrior Asios, Asios Hyrtakos’ son, whom his
tall sorrel steeds brought out of Arisbe, from the river Selleeis. And
of the fourth company was the brave son of Anchises leader, even
Aineias; and with him were two sons of Antenor, Archelochos and Akamas,
both well skilled in all warfare.

And Sarpedon led the glorious allies, and to be with him he chose
Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios, for they seamed to him to be
manifestly the bravest of all after himself but he was excellent, yea,
above all the host. And these when they had arrayed one another with
well-fashioned shields of bulls’ hide, went straight and eager against
the Danaans, nor deemed that they could longer resist them, but that
themselves should fall on the black ships.

Then the rest of the Trojans and the far-famed allies obeyed the
counsel of blameless Polydamas, but Asios, son of Hyrtakos, leader of
men, willed not to leave his horses there, and his squire the
charioteer, but with them he drew near the swift ships, fond man! for
never was he, avoiding evil Fates, to return, rejoicing in his horses
and chariot, back from the ships to windy Ilios. Nay, ere that the Fate
of ill name over-shadowed him, by the spear of Idomeneus, the haughty
son of Deukalion. For Asios went against the left flank of the ships,
whereby the Achaians returned out of the plain with chariots and
horses: there he drave through his horses and his car, nor found he the
doors shut on the gates, and the long bar, but men were holding them
open if perchance they might save any of their comrades fleeing out of
the battle towards the ships. Straight thereby held he his horses with
unswerving aim, and his men followed him, crying shrilly, for they
deemed that the Achaians could no longer hold them off, but that
themselves would fall on the black ships: fools, for in the gates they
found two men of the bravest, the high-hearted sons of the warrior
Lapithae, one the son of Peirithoos, strong Polypoites, and one
Leonteus, peer of Ares the bane of men. These twain stood in front of
the lofty gates, like high-crested oak trees in the hills, that for
ever abide the wind and rain, firm fixed with roots great and long;
even so these twain, trusting to the mightiness of their hands, abode
the coming of great Asios, and fled not. But straight came the Trojans
against the well-builded wall, holding their shields of dry bulls’ hide
on high, with mighty clamour, round the prince Asios, and Iamenos, and
Orestes, and Adamas, son of Asios, and Thoon, and Oinomaos. But the
other twain for a while, being within the wall, urged the well-greaved
Achaians to fight for the ships; but when they saw the Trojans
assailing the wall, while the Danaans cried and turned in flight, then
forth rushed the twain, and fought in front of the gates like wild
boars that in the mountains abide the assailing crew of men and dogs,
and charging on either flank they crush the wood around them, cutting
it at the root, and the clatter of their tusks wages loud, till one
smite them and take their life away: so clattered the bright bronze on
the breasts of the twain, as they were smitten in close fight, for
right hardily they fought, trusting to the host above them, and to
their own strength.

For the men above were casting with stones from the well-builded
towers, in defence of themselves and of the huts, and of the
swift-faring ships. And like snowflakes the stones fell earthward,
flakes that a tempestuous wind, as it driveth the dark clouds, rains
thickly down on the bounteous earth: so thick fell the missiles from
the hands of Achaians and Trojans alike, and their helms rang harsh and
their bossy shields, being smitten with mighty stones. Verily then
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, groaned and smote both his thighs, and
indignantly he spake: “Zeus, verily thou too dost greatly love a lie,
for I deemed not that the Achaian heroes could withstand our might and
our hands invincible. But they like wasps of nimble body, or bees that
have made their dwellings in a rugged path, and leave not their hollow
hold, but abide and keep the hunters at bay for the sake of their
little ones, even so these men have no will to give ground from the
gates, though they are but two, ere they slay or be slain.”

So spake he, nor with his speech did he persuade the mind of Zeus, for
his will was to give renown to Hector.

But the others were fighting about the other gates, and hard it were
for me like a god to tell all these things, for everywhere around the
wall of stone rose the fire divine; the Argives, for all their sorrow,
defending the ships of necessity; and all the gods were grieved at
heart, as many as were defenders of the Danaans in battle. And together
the Lapithae waged war and strife.

There the son of Peirithoos, mighty Polypoites, smote Damasos with the
spear, through the helmet with cheekpieces of bronze; nor did the
bronze helm stay the spear, but the point of bronze brake clean through
the bone, and all the brain within was scattered, and the spear
overcame him in his eagerness. Thereafter he slew Pylon and Ormenos.
And Leonteus of the stock of Ares smote Hippomachos, son of Antimachos,
with the spear, striking him on the girdle. Then again he drew his
sharp sword from the sheath, and smote Antiphates first in close fight,
rushing on him through the throng, that he fell on his back on the
ground; and thereafter he brought down Menon, and Iamenos, and Orestes
one after the other, to the bounteous earth.

While they were stripping from these the shining arms, the young men
who followed with Polydamas and Hector, they that were most in number
and bravest, and most were eager to break the wall and set the ships on
fire, these still stood doubtful by the fosse, for as they were eager
to pass over a bird had appeared to them, an eagle of lofty flight,
skirting the host on the left hand. In its talons it bore a blood-red
monstrous snake, alive, and struggling still; yea, not yet had it
forgotten the joy of battle, but writhed backward and smote the bird
that held it on the breast, beside the neck, and the bird cast it from
him down to the earth, in sore pain, and dropped it in the midst of the
throng; then with a cry sped away down the gusts of the wind. And the
Trojans shuddered when they saw the gleaming snake lying in the midst
of them; an omen of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then verily Polydamas stood by brave Hector, and spake: “Hector, ever
dost thou rebuke me in the assemblies, though I counsel wisely; since
it by no means beseemeth one of the people to speak contrary to thee,
in council or in war, but always to increase thy power; but now again
will I say all that seemeth to me to be best. Let us not advance and
fight with the Danaans for the ships. For even thus, methinks, the end
will be, if indeed this bird hath come for the Trojans when they were
eager to cross the dyke, this eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host
on the left hand, bearing in his talons a blood-red monstrous snake,
yet living; then straightway left he hold of him, before he reached his
own nest, nor brought him home in the end to give to his nestlings.
Even so shall we, though we burst with mighty force the gates and wall
of the Achaians, and the Achaians give ground, even so we shall return
in disarray from the ships by the way we came; for many of the Trojans
shall we leave behind, whom the Achaians will slay with the sword, in
defence of the ships. Even so would a soothsayer interpret that in his
heart had clear knowledge of omens, and whom the people obeyed.”

Then Hector of the glancing helm lowered on him and said: “Polydamas,
that thou speakest is no longer pleasing to me; yea, thou knowest how
to conceive another counsel better than this. But if thou verily
speakest thus in earnest, then the gods themselves have utterly
destroyed thy wits; thou that bidst us forget the counsels of
loud-thundering Zeus, that himself promised me, and confirmed with a
nod of his head! But thou bidst us be obedient to birds long of wing,
whereto I give no heed, nor take any care thereof, whether they fare to
the right, to the dawn and to the sun, or to the left, to mist and
darkness. Nay, for us, let us trust to the counsel of mighty Zeus, who
is king over all mortals and immortals. One omen is best, to fight for
our own country. And wherefore dost thou fear war and battle? For if
all the rest of us be slain by the ships of the Argives, yet needst
thou not fear to perish, for thy heart is not warlike, nor enduring in
battle. But if thou dost hold aloof from the fight, or winnest any
other with thy words to turn him from war, straightway by my spear
shalt thou be smitten, and lose thy life.”

So spake he, and led on, and they followed with a wondrous din; and
Zeus that joyeth in the thunder roused from the hills of Ida, a blast
of wind, which bare the dust straight against the ships; and he made
weak the heart of the Achaians, but gave renown to the Trojans and to
Hector. Trusting then in his omens, and their might, they strove to
break the great wall of the Achaians. They dragged down the
machicolations [projecting galleries] of the towers, and overthrew the
battlements, and heaved up the projecting buttresses, that the Achaians
set first in the earth, to be the props of the towers. These they
overthrew, and hoped to break the wall of the Achaians. Nor even now
did the Danaans give ground from the path, but closed up the
battlements with shields of bulls’ hides, and cast from them at the
foemen as they went below the walls.

Now the two Aiantes went everywhere on the towers, ever urging, and
arousing the courage of the Achaians. One they would accost with
honeyed words, another with hard words they would rebuke, whomsoever
they saw utterly giving ground from the fight: “O friends, whosoever is
eminent, or whosoever is of middle station among the Argives, ay, or
lower yet, for in no wise are all men equal in war, now is there work
for all, and this yourselves well know. Let none turn back to the
ships, for that he hath heard one threatening aloud; nay, get ye
forward, and cheer another on, if perchance Olympian Zeus, the lord of
lightning, will grant us to drive back the assault, and push the foe to
the city.”

So these twain shouted in the front, and aroused the battle of the
Achaians. But as flakes of snow fall thick on a winter day, when Zeus
the Counsellor bath begun to snow, showing forth these arrows of his to
men, and he hath lulled the winds, and he snoweth continually, till he
hath covered the crests of the high hills, and the uttermost headlands,
and the grassy plains, and rich tillage of men; and the snow is
scattered over the havens and shores of the grey sea, and only the wave
as it rolleth in keeps off the snow, but all other things are swathed
over, when the shower of Zeus cometh heavily, so from both sides their
stones flew thick, some towards the Trojans, and some from the Trojans
against the Achaians, while both sides were smitten, and over all the
wall the din arose.

Yet never would the Trojans, then, and renowned Hector have broken the
gates of the wall, and the long bar, if Zeus the Counsellor had not
roused his son Sarpedon against the Argives, like a lion against the
kine of crooked horn. Straightway he held forth his fair round shield,
of hammered bronze, that the bronze-smith had hammered out, and within
had stitched many bulls’ hides with rivets of gold, all round the
circle, this held he forth, and shook two spears; and sped on his way,
like a mountain-nurtured lion, that long lacketh meat, and his brave
spirit urgeth him to make assail on the sheep, and come even against a
well-builded homestead. Nay, even if he find herdsmen thereby, guarding
the sheep with hounds and spears, yet hath he no mind to be driven
without an effort from the steading, but he either leapeth on a sheep,
and seizeth it, or himself is smitten in the foremost place with a dart
from a strong hand. So did his heart then urge on the godlike Sarpedon
to rush against the wall, and break through the battlements. And
instantly he spake to Glaukos, son of Hippolochos: “Glaukos, wherefore
have we twain the chiefest honour,—seats of honour, and messes, and
full cups in Lykia, and all men look on us as gods? And wherefore hold
we a great demesne by the banks of Xanthos, a fair demesne of
orchard-land, and wheat-bearing tilth? Therefore now it behoveth us to
take our stand in the first rank of the Lykians, and encounter fiery
battle, that certain of the well-corsleted Lykians may say, ‘Verily our
kings that rule Lykia be no inglorious men, they that eat fat sheep,
and drink the choice wine honey-sweet: nay, but they are also of
excellent might, for they war in the foremost ranks of the Lykians.’
Ah, friend, if once escaped from this battle we were for ever to be
ageless and immortal, neither would I fight myself in the foremost
ranks, nor would I send thee into the war that giveth men renown, but
now—for assuredly ten thousand fates of death do every way beset us,
and these no mortal may escape nor avoid—now let us go forward, whether
we shall give glory to other men, or others to us.”

So spake he, and Glaukos turned not apart, nor disobeyed him, and they
twain went straight forward, leading the great host of the Lykians.

Then Menestheus son of Peteos shuddered when he beheld them, for
against his tower they went, bringing with them ruin; and he looked
along the tower of the Achaians if perchance he might see any of the
leaders, that would ward off destruction from his comrades, and he
beheld the two Aiantes, insatiate of war, standing there, and Teukros
hard by, newly come from his hut; but he could not cry to be heard of
them, so great was the din, and the noise went up unto heaven of
smitten shields and helms with horse-hair crests, and of the gates, for
they had all been shut, and the Trojans stood beside them, and strove
by force to break them, and enter in. Swiftly then to Aias he sent the
herald Thootes: “Go, noble Thootes, and run, and call Aias: or rather
the twain, for that will be far the best of all, since quickly here
will there be wrought utter ruin. For hereby press the leaders of the
Lykians, who of old are fierce in strong battle. But if beside them too
war and toil arise, yet at least let the strong Telamonian Aias come
alone and let Teukros the skilled bowman follow with him.”

So spake he, and the herald listened and disobeyed him not, but started
and ran by the wall of the mail-clad Achaians, and came, and stood by
the Aiantes, and straightway spake: “Ye twain Aiantes, leaders of the
mail-clad Achaians, the dear son of Peteos, fosterling of Zeus, biddeth
you go thither, that, if it be but for a little while, ye may take your
part in battle: both of you he more desireth, for that will be far the
best of all, since quickly there will there be wrought utter ruin. For
thereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of old are fierce in
strong battle. But if beside you too war and toil arise, yet at least
let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone, and let Teukros the skilled
bowman follow with him.”

So spake he, nor did the strong Telamonian Aias disobey, but instantly
spake winged words to the son of Oileus: “Aias, do ye twain stand here,
thyself and strong Lykomedes, and urge the Danaans to war with all
their might; but I go thither, to take my part in battle, and quickly
will I come again, when I have well aided them.”

So spake Telamonian Aias and departed, and Teukros went with him, his
brother by the same father, and with them Pandion bare the bended bow
of Teukros.

Now when they came to the tower of great-hearted Menestheus, passing
within the wall,—and to men sore pressed they came,—the foe were
climbing upon the battlements, like a dark whirlwind, even the strong
leaders and counsellors of the Lykians; and they hurled together into
the war and the battle-cry arose. Now first did Aias Telamol’s son slay
a man, Epikles great of heart, the comrade of Sarpedon. With a jagged
stone he smote him, a great stone that lay uppermost within the wall,
by the battlements. Not lightly could a man hold it in both hands,
however strong in his youth, of such mortals as now are, but Aias
lifted it, and cast it from above, and shattered the helm of fourfold
crest, and broke the bones of the head, and he fell like a diver from
the lofty tower, and his life left his bones. And Teukros smote
Glaukos, the strong son of Hippolochos, as he came on, with an arrow
from the lofty wall; even where he saw his shoulder bare he smote him,
and made him cease from delight in battle. Back from the wall he leapt
secretly, lest any of the Achaians should see him smitten, and speak
boastfully. But sorrow came on Sarpedon when Glaukos departed, so soon
as he was aware thereof, but he forgot not the joy of battle. He aimed
at Alkmaon, son of Thestor, with the spear, and smote him, and drew out
the spear. And Alkmaon following the spear fell prone, and his
bronze-dight arms rang round him. Then Sarpedon seized with strong
hands the battlement, and dragged, and it all gave way together, while
above the wall was stripped bare, and made a path for many.

Then Aias and Teukros did encounter him: Teukros smote him with an
arrow, on the bright baldric of his covering shield, about the breast,
but Zeus warded off the Fates from his son, that he should not be
overcome beside the ships’ sterns. Then Aias leaped on and smote his
shield, nor did the spear pass clean through, yet shook he Sarpedon in
his eagerness. He gave ground a little way from the battlement, yet
retreated not wholly, since his heart hoped to win renown. Then he
turned and cried to the godlike Lykians: “O Lykians, wherefore thus are
ye slack in impetuous valour. Hard it is for me, stalwart as I am,
alone to break through, and make a path to the ships, nay, follow hard
after me, for the more men, the better work.”

So spake he, and they, dreading the rebuke of their king, pressed on
the harder around the counsellor and king. And the Argives on the other
side made strong their battalions within the wall, and mighty toil
began for them. For neither could the strong Lykians burst through the
wall of the Danaans, and make a way to the ships, nor could the warlike
Danaans drive back the Lykians from the wall, when once they had drawn
near thereto. But as two men contend about the marches of their land,
with measuring rods in their hands, in a common field, when in narrow
space they strive for equal shares, even so the battlements divided
them, and over those they smote the round shields of ox hide about the
breasts of either side, and the fluttering bucklers. And many were
wounded in the flesh with the ruthless bronze, whensoever the back of
any of the warriors was laid bare as he turned, ay, and many clean
through the very shield. Yea, everywhere the towers and battlements
swam with the blood of men shed on either side, by Trojans and
Achaians. But even so they could not put the Argives to rout, but they
held their ground, as an honest woman that laboureth with her hands
holds the balance, and raises the weight and the wool together,
balancing them, that she may win scant wages for her children; so
evenly was strained their war and battle, till the moment when Zeus
gave the greater renown to Hector, son of Priam, who was the first to
leap within the wall of the Achaians. In a piercing voice he cried
aloud to the Trojans: “Rise, ye horse-taming Trojans, break the wall of
the Argives, and cast among the ships fierce blazing fire.”

So spake he, spurring them on, and they all heard him with their ears,
and in one mass rushed straight against the wall, and with sharp spears
in their hands climbed upon the machicolations of the towers. And
Hector seized and carried a stone that lay in front of the gates, thick
in the hinder part, but sharp at point: a stone that not the two best
men of the people, such as mortals now are, could lightly lift from the
ground on to a wain, but easily he wielded it alone, for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos made it light for him. And as when a
shepherd lightly beareth the fleece of a ram, taking it in one hand,
and little doth it burden him, so Hector lifted the stone, and bare it
straight against the doors that closely guarded the stubborn-set
portals, double gates and tall, and two cross bars held them within,
and one bolt fastened them. And he came, and stood hard by, and firmly
planted himself, and smote them in the midst, setting his legs well
apart, that his cast might lack no strength. And he brake both the
hinges, and the stone fell within by reason of its weight, and the
gates rang loud around, and the bars held not, and the doors burst this
way and that beneath the rush of the stone. Then glorious Hector leaped
in, with face like the sudden night, shining in wondrous mail that was
clad about his body, and with two spears in his hands. No man that met
him could have held him back when once he leaped within the gates: none
but the gods, and his eyes shone with fire. Turning towards the throng
he cried to the Trojans to overleap the wall, and they obeyed his
summons, and speedily some overleaped the wall, and some poured into
the fair-wrought gateways, and the Danaans fled in fear among the
hollow ships, and a ceaseless clamour arose.



BOOK XIII.

Poseidon stirreth up the Achaians to defend the ships. The valour of
Idomeneus.


Now Zeus, after that he had brought the Trojans and Hector to the
ships, left them to their toil and endless labour there, but otherwhere
again he turned his shining eyes, and looked upon the land of the
Thracian horsebreeders, and the Mysians, fierce fighters hand to hand,
and the proud Hippemolgoi that drink mare’s milk, and the Abioi, the
most righteous of men. To Troy no more at all he turned his shining
eyes, for he deemed in his heart that not one of the Immortals would
draw near, to help either Trojans or Danaans.

But the mighty Earth-shaker held no blind watch, who sat and marvelled
on the war and strife, high on the topmost crest of wooded Samothrace,
for thence all Ida was plain to see; and plain to see were the city of
Priam, and the ships of the Achaians. Thither did he go from the sea
and sate him down, and he had pity on the Achaians, that they were
subdued to the Trojans, and strong was his anger against Zeus.

Then forthwith he went down from the rugged hill, faring with swift
steps, and the high hills trembled, and the woodland, beneath the
immortal footsteps of Poseidon as he moved. Three strides he made, and
with the fourth he reached his goal, even Aigae, and there was his
famous palace in the deeps of the mere, his glistering golden mansions
builded, imperishable for ever. Thither went he, and let harness to the
car his bronze-hooved horses, swift of flight, clothed with their
golden manes. He girt his own golden array about his body, and seized
the well-wrought lash of gold, and mounted his chariot, and forth he
drove across the waves. And the sea beasts frolicked beneath him, on
all sides out of the deeps, for well they knew their lord, and with
gladness the sea stood asunder, and swiftly they sped, and the axle of
bronze was not wetted beneath, and the bounding steeds bare him on to
the ships of the Achaians.

Now there is a spacious cave in the depths of the deep mere, between
Tenedos and rugged Imbros; there did Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth,
stay his horses, and loosed them out of the chariot, and cast before
them ambrosial food to graze withal, and golden tethers he bound about
their hooves, tethers neither to be broken nor loosed, that there the
horses might continually await their lord’s return. And he went to the
host of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans like flame or storm-wind were following in close array,
with fierce intent, after Hector, son of Priam. With shouts and cries
they came, and thought to take the ships of the Achaians, and to slay
thereby all the bravest of the host. But Poseidon, that girdleth the
world, the Shaker of the earth, was urging on the Argives, and forth he
came from the deep salt sea, in form and untiring voice like unto
Kalchas. First he spake to the two Aiantes, that themselves were eager
for battle: “Ye Aiantes twain, ye shall save the people of the
Achaians, if ye are mindful of your might, and reckless of chill fear.
For verily I do not otherwhere dread the invincible hands of the
Trojans, that have climbed the great wall in their multitude, nay, the
well-greaved Achaians will hold them all at bay; but hereby verily do I
greatly dread lest some evil befall us, even here where that furious
one is leading like a flame of fire, Hector, who boasts him to be son
of mighty Zeus. Nay, but here may some god put it into the hearts of
you twain, to stand sturdily yourselves, and urge others to do the
like; thereby might ye drive him from the fleet-faring ships, despite
his eagerness, yea, even if the Olympian himself is rousing him to
war.”

Therewith the Shaker of the world, the girdler of the earth, struck the
twain with his staff, and filled them with strong courage, and their
limbs he made light, and their feet, and their hands withal. Then, even
as a swift-winged hawk speeds forth to fly, poised high above a tall
sheer rock, and swoops to chase some other bird across the plain, even
so Poseidon sped from them, the Shaker of the world. And of the twain
Oileus’ son, the swift-footed Aias, was the first to know the god, and
instantly he spake to Aias, son of Telamon: “Aias, since it is one of
the gods who hold Olympus, that in the semblance of a seer commands us
now to fight beside the ships-not Kalchas is he, the prophet and
sooth-sayer, for easily I knew the tokens of his feet and knees as he
turned away, and the gods are easy to discern—lo, then mine own heart
within my breast is more eagerly set on war and battle, and my feet
beneath and my hands above are lusting for the fight.”

Then Aias, son of Telamon, answered him saying: “Even so, too, my hands
invincible now rage about the spear-shaft, and wrath has risen within
me, and both my feet are swift beneath me; yea, I am keen to meet, even
in single fight, the ceaseless rage of Hector son of Priam.”

So they spake to each other, rejoicing in the delight of battle, which
the god put in their heart. Then the girdler of the earth stirred up
the Achaians that were in the rear and were renewing their strength
beside the swift ships. Their limbs were loosened by their grievous
toil, yea, and their souls filled with sorrow at the sight of the
Trojans, that had climbed over the great wall in their multitude. And
they looked on them, and shed tears beneath their brows, thinking that
never would they escape destruction. But the Shaker of the earth right
easily came among them, and urged on the strong battalions of warriors.
Teukros first he came and summoned, and Leitos, and the hero Peneleos,
and Thoas, and Deipyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos, lords of the
war-cry, all these he spurred on with winged words: “Shame on you,
Argives, shame, ye striplings, in your battle had I trusted for the
salvation of our ships. But if you are to withdraw from grievous war,
now indeed the day doth shine that shall see us conquered by the
Trojans. Out on it, for verily a great marvel is this that mine eyes
behold, a terrible thing that methought should never come to pass, the
Trojans advancing against our ships! Of yore they were like fleeting
hinds, that in the wild wood are the prey of jackals, and pards, and
wolves, and wander helpless, strengthless, empty of the joy of battle.
Even so the Trojans of old cared never to wait and face the wrath and
the hands of the Achaians, not for a moment. But now they are fighting
far from the town, by the hollow ships, all through the baseness of our
leader and the remissness of the people, who, being at strife with the
chief, have no heart to defend the swift-faring ships, nay, thereby
they are slain. But if indeed and in truth the hero Agamemnon, the
wide-ruling son of Atreus, is the very cause of all, for that he did
dishonour the swift-footed son of Peleus, not even so may we refrain in
any wise from war. Nay, let us right our fault with speed, for easily
righted are the hearts of the brave. No longer do ye well to refrain
from impetuous might, all ye that are the best men of the host. I
myself would not quarrel with one that, being a weakling, abstained
from war, but with you I am heartily wroth. Ah, friends, soon shall ye
make the mischief more through this remissness,—but let each man
conceive shame in his heart, and indignation, for verily great is the
strife that hath arisen. Lo, the mighty Hector of the loud war-cry is
fighting at the ships, and the gates and the long bar he hath burst in
sunder.”

On this wise did the Earth-enfolder call to and spur on the Achaians.
And straightway they made a stand around the two Aiantes, strong bands
that Ares himself could not enter and make light of, nor Athene that
marshals the host. Yea, they were the chosen best that abode the
Trojans and goodly Hector, and spear on spear made close-set fence, and
shield on serried shield, buckler pressed on buckler, and helm on helm,
and man on man. The horse-hair crests on the bright helmet-ridges
touched each other as they nodded, so close they stood each by other,
and spears brandished in bold hands were interlaced; and their hearts
were steadfast and lusted for battle.

Then the Trojans drave forward in close array, and Hector led them,
pressing straight onwards, like a rolling rock from a cliff, that the
winter-swollen water thrusteth from the crest of a hill, having broken
the foundations of the stubborn rock with its wondrous flood; leaping
aloft it flies, and the wood echoes under it, and unstayed it runs its
course, till it reaches the level plain, and then it rolls no more for
all its eagerness,—even so Hector for a while threatened lightly to win
to the sea through the huts and the ships of the Achaians, slaying as
he came, but when he encountered the serried battalions, he was stayed
when he drew near against them. But they of the other part, the sons of
the Achaians, thrust with their swords and double-pointed spears, and
drave him forth from them, that he gave ground and reeled backward.
Then he cried with a piercing voice, calling on the Trojans: “Trojans,
and Lykians, and close-fighting Dardanians, hold your ground, for the
Achaians will not long ward me off, nay, though they have arrayed
themselves in fashion like a tower. Rather, methinks, they will flee
back before the spear, if verily the chief of gods has set me on, the
loud-thundering lord of Hera.”

Therewith he spurred on the heart and spirit of each man; and
Deiphobos, the son of Priam, strode among them with high thoughts, and
held in front of him the circle of his shield, and lightly he stepped
with his feet, advancing beneath the cover of his shield. Then Meriones
aimed at him with a shining spear, and struck, and missed not, but
smote the circle of the bulls-hide shield, yet no whit did he pierce
it; nay, well ere that might be, the long spear-shaft snapped in the
socket. Now Deiphobos was holding off from him the bulls-hide shield,
and his heart feared the lance of wise Meriones, but that hero shrunk
back among the throng of his comrades, greatly in wrath both for the
loss of victory, and of his spear, that he had shivered. So he set
forth to go to the huts and the ships of the Achaians, to bring a long
spear, that he had left in his hut.

Meanwhile the others were fighting on, and there arose an
inextinguishable cry. First Teukros, son of Telamon, slew a man, the
spearman Imbrios, the son of Mentor rich in horses. In Pedaion he
dwelt, before the coming of the sons of the Achaians, and he had for
wife a daughter of Priam, born out of wedlock, Medesikaste; but when
the curved ships of the Danaans came, he returned again to Ilios, and
was pre-eminent among the Trojans, and dwelt with Priam, who honoured
him like his own children. Him the son of Telemon pierced below the ear
with his long lance, and plucked back the spear. Then he fell like an
ash that on the crest of a far-seen hill is smitten with the axe of
bronze, and brings its delicate foliage to the ground; even so he fell,
and round him rang his armour bedight with bronze. Then Teukros rushed
forth, most eager to strip his armour, and Hector cast at him as he
came with his shining spear. But Teukros, steadily regarding him,
avoided by a little the spear of bronze; so Hector struck Amphimachos,
son of Kteatos, son of Aktor, in the breast with the spear, as he was
returning to the battle. With a crash he fell, and his armour rang upon
him.

Then Hector sped forth to tear from the head of great-hearted
Amphimachos the helmet closely fitted to his temples, but Aias aimed at
Hector as he came, with a shining spear, yet in no wise touched his
body, for he was all clad in dread armour of bronze; but he smote the
boss of his shield, and drave him back by main force, and he gave place
from behind the two dead men, and the Achaians drew them out of the
battle. So Stichios and goodly Menestheus, leaders of the Athenians,
conveyed Amphimachos back among the host of the Achaians, but Imbrios
the two Aiantes carried, with hearts full of impetuous might. And as
when two lions have snatched away a goat from sharp-toothed hounds, and
carry it through the deep thicket, holding the body on high above the
ground in their jaws, so the two warrior Aiantes held Imbrios aloft and
spoiled his arms. Then the son of Oileus cut his head from his delicate
neck, in wrath for the sake of Amphimachos, and sent it rolling like a
ball through the throng, and it dropped in the dust before the feet of
Hector.

Then verily was Poseidon wroth at heart, when his sol’s son fell in the
terrible fray. [Kteatos, father of Amphimachos, was Poseidol’s son.] So
he set forth to go by the huts and the ships of the Achaians, to spur
on the Danaans, and sorrows he was contriving for the Trojans. Then
Idomeneus, spearman renowned, met him on his way from his comrade that
had but newly returned to him out of the battle, wounded on the knee
with the sharp bronze. Him his comrades carried forth, and Idomeneus
gave charge to the leeches, and so went on to his hut, for he still was
eager to face the war. Then the mighty Shaker of the earth addressed
him, in the voice of Thoas, son of Andraimon, that ruled over the
Aitolians in all Pleuron, and mountainous Kalydon, and was honoured
like a god by the people: “Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans,
say, whither have thy threats fared, wherewith the sons of the Achaians
threatened the Trojans?”

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “O Thaos,
now is there no man to blame, that I wot of, for we all are skilled in
war. Neither is there any man that spiritless fear holds aloof, nor any
that gives place to cowardice, and shuns the cruel war, nay, but even
thus, methinks, must it have seemed good to almighty Kronion, even that
the Achaians should perish nameless here, far away from Argos. But
Thoas, seeing that of old thou wert staunch, and dost spur on some
other man, wheresoever thou mayst see any give ground, therefore
slacken not now, but call aloud to every warrior.”

Then Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth, answered him again: “Idomeneus,
never may that man go forth out of Troy-land, but here may he be the
sport of dogs, who this day wilfully is slack in battle. Nay, come,
take thy weapons and away: herein we must play the man together, if any
avail there may be, though we are no more than two. Ay, and very
cowards get courage from company, but we twain know well how to battle
even with the brave.”

Therewith the god went back again into the strife of men, but
Idomeneus, so soon as he came to his well-builded hut, did on his fair
armour about his body, and grasped two spears, and set forth like the
lightning that Kronion seizes in his hand and brandishes from radiant
Olympus, showing forth a sign to mortal men, and far seen are the
flames thereof. Even so shone the bronze about the breast of Idomeneus
as he ran, and Meriones, his good squire, met him, while he was still
near his hut,—he was going to bring his spear of bronze,—and mighty
Idomeneus spake to him: “Meriones son of Molos, fleet of foot, dearest
of my company, wherefore hast thou come hither and left the war and
strife? Art thou wounded at all, and vexed by a dart’s point, or dost
thou come with a message for me concerning aught? Verily I myself have
no desire to sit in the huts, but to fight.”

Then wise Meriones answered him again, saying: “I have come to fetch a
spear, if perchance thou hast one left in the huts, for that which
before I carried I have shivered in casting at the shield of proud
Deiphobos.”

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “Spears, if
thou wilt, thou shalt find, one, ay, and twenty, standing in the hut,
against the shining side walls, spears of the Trojans whereof I have
spoiled their slain. Yea, it is not my mood to stand and fight with
foemen from afar, wherefore I have spears, and bossy shields, and
helms, and corslets of splendid sheen.”

Then wise Meriones answered him again: “Yea, and in mine own hut and my
black ship are many spoils of the Trojans, but not ready to my hand.
Nay, for methinks that neither am I forgetful of valour; but stand
forth among the foremost to face the glorious war, whensoever ariseth
the strife of battle. Any other, methinks, of the mail-clad Achaians
should sooner forget my prowess, but thou art he that knoweth it.”

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “I know what
a man of valour thou art, wherefore shouldst thou tell me thereof? Nay,
if now beside the ships all the best of us were being chosen for an
ambush—wherein the valour of men is best discerned; there the coward,
and the brave man most plainly declare themselves: for the colour of
the coward changes often, and his spirit cannot abide firm within him,
but now he kneels on one knee, now on the other, and rests on either
foot, and his heart beats noisily in his breast, as he thinks of doom,
and his teeth chatter loudly. But the colour of the brave man does not
change, nor is he greatly afraid, from the moment that he enters the
ambush of heroes, but his prayer is to mingle instantly in woeful war.
Were we being chosen for such an ambush, I say, not even then would any
man reckon lightly of thy courage and thy strength. Nay, and even if
thou wert stricken in battle from afar, or smitten in close fight, the
dart would not strike thee in the hinder part of the neck, nor in the
back, but would encounter thy breast or belly, as thou dost press on,
towards the gathering of the foremost fighters. But come, no more let
us talk thus, like children, loitering here, lest any man be vehemently
wroth, but go thou to the hut, and bring the strong spear.”

Thus he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, quickly bare the
spear of bronze from the hut, and went after Idomeneus, with high
thoughts of battle. And even as Ares, the bane of men, goes forth into
the war, and with him follows his dear son Panic, stark and fearless,
that terrifies even the hardy warrior; and these twain leave Thrace,
and harness them for fight with the Ephyri, or the great-hearted
Phlegyans, yet hearken not to both peoples, but give honour to one
only; like these gods did Meriones and Idomeneus, leaders of men, set
forth into the fight, harnessed in gleaming bronze. And Meriones spake
first to Idomeneus saying: “Child of Deukalion, whither art thou eager
to enter into the throng: on the right of all the host, or in the
centre, or on the left? Ay, and no other where, methinks, are the
flowing-haired Achaians so like to fail in fight.”

Then Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “In the
centre of the ships there are others to bear the brunt, the two
Aiantes, and Teukros, the best bowman of the Achaians, ay, and a good
man in close fight; these will give Hector Priam’s son toil enough,
howsoever keen he be for battle; yea, though he be exceeding stalwart.
Hard will he find it, with all his lust for war, to overcome their
strength and their hands invincible, and to fire the ships, unless
Kronion himself send down on the swift ships a burning brand. But not
to a man would he yield, the great Telamonian Aias, to a man that is
mortal and eateth Demeter’s grain, and may be chosen with the sword of
bronze, and with hurling of great stones. Nay, not even to Achilles the
breaker of the ranks of men would he give way, not in close fight; but
for speed of foot none may in any wise strive with Achilles. But guide
us twain, as thou sayest, to the left hand of the host, that speedily
we may learn whether we are to win glory from others, or other men from
us.”

So he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, led the way, till
they came to the host, in that place whither he bade him go.

And when the Trojans saw Idomeneus, strong as flame, and his squire
with him, and their glorious armour, they all shouted and made for him
through the press. Then their mellay began, by the sterns of the ships.
And as the gusts speed on, when shrill winds blow, on a day when dust
lies thickest on the roads, and the winds raise together a great cloud
of dust, even so their battle clashed together, and all were fain of
heart to slay each other in the press with the keen bronze. And the
battle, the bane of men, bristled with the long spears, the piercing
spears they grasped, and the glitter of bronze from gleaming helmets
dazzled the eyes, and the sheen of new-burnished corslets, and shining
shields, as the men thronged all together. Right hardy of heart would
he have been that joyed and sorrowed not at the sight of this labour of
battle.

Thus the two mighty sons of Kronos, with contending will, were
contriving sorrow and anguish for the heroes. Zeus desired victory for
the Trojans and Hector, giving glory to swift-footed Achilles; yet he
did not wish the Achaian host to perish utterly before Ilios, but only
to give renown to Thetis and her strong-hearted son. But Poseidon went
among the Argives and stirred them to war, stealing secretly forth from
the grey salt sea: for he was sore vexed that they were overcome by the
Trojans, and was greatly in wrath against Zeus. Verily both were of the
same lineage and the same place of birth, but Zeus was the elder and
the wiser. Therefore also Poseidon avoided to give open aid, but
secretly ever he spurred them on, throughout the host, in the likeness
of a man. These twain had strained the ends of the cords of strong
strife and equal war, and had stretched them over both Trojans and
Achaians, a knot that none might break nor undo, for the loosening of
the knees of many.

Even then Idomeneus, though his hair was flecked with grey, called on
the Danaans, and leaping among the Trojans, roused their terror. For he
slew Othryoneus of Kabesos, a sojourner there, who but lately had
followed after the rumour of war, and asked in marriage the fairest of
the daughters of Priam, Kassandra, without gifts of wooing, but with
promise of mighty deed, namely that he would drive perforce out of
Troy-land the sons of the Achaians. To him the old man Priam had
promised and appointed that he would give her, so he fought trusting in
his promises. And Idomeneus aimed at him with a bright spear, and cast
and smote him as he came proudly striding on, and the corslet of bronze
that he wore availed not, but the lance struck in the midst of his
belly. And he fell with a crash, and Idomeneus boasted over him, and
lifted up his voice, saying: “Othryoneus, verily I praise thee above
all mortal men, if indeed thou shalt accomplish all that thou hast
promised Priam, son of Dardanos, that promised thee again his own
daughter. Yea, and we likewise would promise as much to thee, and
fulfil it, and would give thee the fairest daughter of the son of
Atreus, and bring her from Argos, and wed her to thee, if only thou
wilt aid us to take the fair-set citadel of Ilios. Nay, follow us that
we may make a covenant of marriage by the seafaring ships, for we are
no hard exacters of gifts of wooing.”

Therewith the hero Idomeneus dragged him by the foot across the fierce
mellay. But Asios came to his aid, on foot before his horses that the
charioteer guided so that still their breath touched the shoulders of
Asios. And the desire of his heart was to cast at Idomeneus, who was
beforehand with him, and smote him with the spear in the throat, below
the chin, and drove the point straight through. And he fell as an oak
falls, or a poplar, or tall pine tree, that craftsmen have felled on
the hills with new whetted axes, to be a ship’s timber; even so he lay
stretched out before the horses and the chariot, groaning, and
clutching the bloody dust. And the charioteer was amazed, and kept not
his wits, as of old, and dared not turn his horses and avoid out of the
hands of foemen; and Antilochos the steadfast in war smote him, and
pierced the middle of his body with a spear. Nothing availed the
corslet of bronze he was wont to wear, but he planted the spear fast in
the midst of his belly. Therewith he fell gasping from the well-wrought
chariot, and Antilochos, the son of great-hearted Nestor, drave the
horses out from the Trojans, among the well-greaved Achaians. Then
Deiphobos, in sorrow for Asios, drew very nigh Idomeneus, and cast at
him with his shining spear. But Idomeneus steadily watching him,
avoided the spear of bronze, being hidden beneath the circle of his
shield, the shield covered about with ox-hide and gleaming bronze, that
he allows bore, fitted with two arm-rods: under this he crouched
together, and the spear of bronze flew over. And his shield rang
sharply, as the spear grazed thereon. Yet it flew not vainly from the
heavy hand of Deiphobos, but smote Hypsenor, son of Hippasos, the
shepherd of the hosts, in the liver, beneath the midriff, and instantly
unstrung his knees. And Deiphobos boasted over him terribly, crying
aloud: “Ah, verily, not unavenged lies Asios, nay, methinks, that even
on his road to Hades, strong Warden of the gate, he will rejoice at
heart, since, lo, I have sent him escort for the way!”

So spake he, but grief came on the Argives by reason of his boast, and
stirred above all the soul of the wise-hearted Antilochos, yet, despite
his sorrow, he was not heedless of his dear comrade, but ran and stood
over him, and covered him with his buckler. Then two trusty companions,
Mekisteus, son of Echios, and goodly Alastor, stooped down and lifted
him, and with heavy groaning bare him to the hollow ships.

And Idomeneus relaxed not his mighty force, but ever was striving,
either to cover some one of the Trojans with black night, or himself to
fall in warding off death from the Achaians. There the dear son of
Aisyetes, fosterling of Zeus, even the hero Alkathoos, was slain, who
was son-in-law of Anchises, and had married the eldest of his
daughters, Hippodameia, whom her father and her lady mother dearly
loved in the halls, for she excelled all the maidens of her age in
beauty, and skill, and in wisdom, wherefore the best man in wide Troy
took her to wife. This Alkathoos did Poseidon subdue to Idomeneus,
throwing a spell over his shining eyes, and snaring his glorious limbs;
so that he might neither flee backwards, nor avoid the stroke, but
stood steady as a pillar, or a tree with lofty crown of leaves, when
the hero Idomeneus smote him in the midst of the breast with the spear,
and rent the coat of bronze about him, that aforetime warded death from
his body, but now rang harsh as it was rent by the spear. And he fell
with a crash, and the lance fixed in his heart, that, still beating,
shook the butt-end of the spear. Then at length mighty Ares spent its
fury there; but Idomeneus boasted terribly, and cried aloud:
“Deiphobos, are we to deem it fair acquittal that we have slain three
men for one, since thou boastest thus? Nay, sir, but stand thou up also
thyself against me, that thou mayst know what manner of son of Zeus am
I that have come hither! For Zeus first begat Minos, the warden of
Crete, and Minos got him a son, the noble Deukalion, and Deukalion
begat me, a prince over many men in wide Crete, and now have the ships
brought me hither, a bane to thee and thy father, and all the Trojans.”

Thus he spake, but the thoughts of Deiphobos were divided, whether he
should retreat, and call to his aid some one of the great-hearted
Trojans, or should try the adventure alone. And on this wise to his
mind it seemed the better, to go after Aineias, whom he found standing
the last in the press, for Aineias was ever wroth against goodly Priam,
for that Priam gave him no honour, despite his valour among men. So
Deiphobos stood by him, and spake winged words to him: “Aineias, thou
counsellor of the Trojans, now verily there is great need that thou
shouldst succour thy sister’s husband, if any care for kin doth touch
thee. Nay follow, let us succour Alkathoos, thy sister’s husband, who
of old did cherish thee in his hall, while thou wert but a little one,
and now, lo, spear-famed Idomeneus hath stripped him of his arms!”

So he spake, and roused the spirit in the breast of Aineias, who went
to seek Idomeneus, with high thoughts of war. But fear took not hold
upon Idomeneus, as though he had been some tender boy, but he stood at
bay, like a boar on the hills that trusteth to his strength, and abides
the great assailing throng of men in a lonely place, and he bristles up
his back, and his eyes shine with fire, while he whets his tusks, and
is right eager to keep at bay both men and hounds. Even so stood
spear-famed Idomeneus at bay against Aineias, that came to the rescue,
and gave ground no whit, but called on his comrades, glancing to
Askalaphos, and Aphareus, and Deipyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos,
all masters of the war-cry; them he spurred up to battle, and spake
winged words: “Hither, friends, and rescue me, all alone as I am, and
terribly I dread the onslaught of swift-footed Aineias, that is
assailing me; for he is right strong to destroy men in battle, and he
hath the flower of youth, the greatest avail that may be. Yea, if he
and I were of like age, and in this spirit whereof now we are, speedily
should he or I achieve high victory.”

So he spake, and they all, being of one spirit in their hearts, stood
hard by each other, with buckler laid on shoulder. But Aineias, on the
other side, cried to his comrades, glancing to Deiphobos, and Paris,
and noble Agenor, that with him were leaders of the Trojans; and then
the hosts followed them, as sheep follow their leader to the water from
the pasture, and the shepherd is glad at heart; even so the heart of
Aineias was glad in his breast, when he saw the hosts of the people
following to aid him.

Then they rushed in close fight around Alkathoos with their long
spears, and round their breasts the bronze rang terribly, as they aimed
at each other in the press, while two men of war beyond the rest,
Aineias and Idomeneus, the peers of Ares, were each striving to hew the
flesh of the other with the pitiless bronze. Now Aineias first cast at
Idomeneus, who steadily watching him avoided the spear of bronze, and
the point of Aineias went quivering in the earth, since vainly it had
flown from his stalwart hand. But Idomeneus smote Oinomaos in the midst
of the belly, and brake the plate of his corslet, and the bronze let
forth the bowels through the corslet, and he fell in the dust and
clutched the earth in his palms. And Idomeneus drew forth the
far-shadowing spear from the dead, but could not avail to strip the
rest of the fair armour from his shoulders, for the darts pressed hard
on him. Nay, and his feet no longer served him firmly in a charge, nor
could he rush after his own spear, nor avoid the foe. Wherefore in
close fight he still held off the pitiless day of destiny, but in
retreat: his feet no longer bore him swiftly from the battle. And as he
was slowly departing, Deiphobos aimed at him with his shining spear,
for verily he ever cherished a steadfast hatred against Idomeneus. But
this time, too, he missed him, and smote Askalapbos, the son of
Enyalios, with his dart, and the strong spear passed through his
shoulder, and he fell in the dust, and clutched the earth in his
outstretched hand. But loud-voiced awful Ares was not yet aware at all
that his son had fallen in strong battle, but he was reclining on the
peak of Olympus, beneath the golden clouds, being held there by the
design of Zeus, where also were the other deathless gods, restrained
from the war.

Now the people rushed in close fight around Askalaphos, and Deiphobos
tore from Askalaphos his shining helm, but Meriones, the peer of swift
Ares, leaped forward and smote the arm of Deiphobos with his spear, and
from his hand the vizored casque fell clanging to the ground. And
Meriones sprang forth instantly, like a vulture, and drew the strong
spear from the shoulder of Deiphobos, and fell back among the throng of
his comrades. But the own brother of Deiphobos, Polites, stretched his
hands round his waist, and led him forth from the evil din of war, even
till he came to the swift horses, that waited for him behind the battle
and the fight, with their charioteer, and well-dight chariot. These
bore him heavily groaning to the city, worn with his hurt, and the
blood ran down from his newly wounded arm.

But the rest still were fighting, and the war-cry rose unquenched.
There Aineias rushed on Aphareus, son of Kaletor, and struck his
throat, that chanced to be turned to him, with the keen spear, and his
head dropped down and his shield and helm fell with him, and death that
slays the spirit overwhelmed him. And Antilochos watched Thoon as he
turned the other way, and leaped on him, and wounded him, severing all
the vein that runs up the back till it reaches the neck; this he
severed clean, and Thoon fell on his back in the dust, stretching out
both his hands to his comrades dear. Then Antilochos rushed on, and
stripped the armour from his shoulders, glancing around while the
Trojans gathered from here and there, and smote his wide shining
shield, yet did not avail to graze, behind the shield, the delicate
flesh of Antilochos with the pitiless bronze. For verily Poseidon, the
Shaker of the earth, did guard on every side the son of Nestor, even in
the midst of the javelins. And never did Antilochos get free of the
foe, but turned him about among them, nor ever was his spear at rest,
but always brandished and shaken, and the aim of his heart was to smite
a foeman from afar, or to set on him at close quarters. But as he was
aiming through the crowd, he escaped not the ken of Adamas, son of
Asios, who smote the midst of his shield with the sharp bronze, setting
on nigh at hand; but Poseidon of the dark locks made his shaft of no
avail, grudging him the life of Antilochos. And part of the spear abode
there, like a burned stake, in the shield of Antilochos, and half lay
on the earth, and back retreated Adamas to the ranks of his comrades,
avoiding Fate. But Meriones following after him as he departed, smote
him with a spear between the privy parts and the navel, where a wound
is most baneful to wretched mortals. Even there he fixed the spear in
him and he fell, and writhed about the spear, even as a bull that
herdsmen on the hills drag along perforce when they have bound him with
withes, so he when he was smitten writhed for a moment, not for long,
till the hero Meriones came near, and drew the spear out of his body.
And darkness covered his eyes.

And Helenos in close fight smote Deipyros on the temple, with a great
Thracian sword, and tore away the helm, and the helm, being dislodged,
fell on the ground, and one of the Achaians in the fight picked it up
as it rolled between his feet. But dark night covered the eyes of
Deipyros.

Then grief took hold of the son of Atreus, Menelaos of the loud
war-cry, and he went with a threat against the warrior Helenos, the
prince, shaking his sharp spear, while the other drew the centre-piece
of his bow. And both at once were making ready to let fly, one with his
sharp spear, the other with the arrow from the string. Then the son of
Priam smote Menelaos on the breast with his arrow, on the plate of the
corslet, and off flew the bitter arrow. Even as from a broad shovel in
a great threshing floor, fly the black-skinned beans and pulse, before
the whistling wind, and the stress of the winnower’s shovel, even so
from the corslet of the renowned Menelaos flew glancing far aside the
bitter arrow. But the son of Atreus, Menelaos of the loud war-cry,
smote the hand of Helenos wherein he held the polished bow, and into
the bow, clean through the hand, was driven the spear of bronze. Back
he withdrew to the ranks of his comrades, avoiding Fate, with his hand
hanging down at his side, for the ashen spear dragged after him. And
the great-hearted Agenor drew the spear from his hand, and himself
bound up the hand with a band of twisted sheep’s-wool, a sling that a
squire carried for him, the shepherd of the host.

Then Peisandros made straight for renowned Menelaos, but an evil Fate
was leading him to the end of Death; by thee, Menelaos, to be overcome
in the dread strife of battle. Now when the twain had come nigh in
onset upon each other, the son of Atreus missed, and his spear was
turned aside, but Peisandros smote the shield of renowned Menelaos, yet
availed not to drive the bronze clean through, for the wide shield
caught it, and the spear brake in the socket, yet Peisandros rejoiced
in his heart, and hoped for the victory. But the son of Atreus drew his
silver-studded sword, and leaped upon Peisandros. And Peisandros, under
his shield, clutched his goodly axe of fine bronze, with long and
polished haft of olive-wood, and the twain set upon each other. Then
Peisandros smote the crest of the helmet shaded with horse hair, close
below the very plume, but Menelaos struck the other, as he came
forward, on the brow, above the base of the nose, and the bones
cracked, and the eyes, all bloody, fell at his feet in the dust. Then
he bowed and fell, and Menelaos set his foot on his breast, and
stripped him of his arms, and triumphed, saying: “Even thus then
surely, ye will leave the ships of the Danaans of the swift steeds, ye
Trojans overweening, insatiate of the dread din of war. Yea, and ye
shall not lack all other reproof and shame, wherewith ye made me
ashamed, ye hounds of evil, having no fear in your hearts of the strong
wrath of loud-thundering Zeus, the god of guest and host, who one day
will destroy your steep citadel. O ye that wantonly carried away my
wedded wife and many of my possessions, when ye were entertained by
her, now again ye are fain to throw ruinous fire on the seafaring
ships, and to slay the Achaian heroes. Nay, but ye will yet refrain you
from battle, for as eager as ye be. O Zeus, verily they say that thou
dost excel in wisdom all others, both gods and men, and all these
things are from thee. How wondrously art thou favouring men of
violence, even the Trojans, whose might is ever iniquitous, nor can
they have their fill of the din of equal war. Of all things there is
satiety, yea, even of love and sleep, and of sweet song, and dance
delectable, whereof a man would sooner have his fill than of war, but
the Trojans are insatiable of battle.”

Thus noble Menelaos spake, and stripped the bloody arms from the body,
and gave them to his comrades, and instantly himself went forth again,
and mingled in the forefront of the battle. Then Harpalion, the son of
king Pylaimenes, leaped out against him, Harpalion that followed his
dear father to Troy, to the war, nor ever came again to his own
country. He then smote the middle of the shield of Atreus’ son with his
spear, in close fight, yet availed not to drive the bronze clean
through, but fell back into the host of his comrades, avoiding Fate,
glancing round every way, lest one should wound his flesh with the
bronze. But Meriones shot at him as he retreated with a bronze-shod
arrow, and smote him in the right buttock, and the arrow went right
through the bladder and came out under the bone. And sitting down, even
there, in the arms of his dear comrades, he breathed away his soul,
lying stretched like a worm on the earth, and out flowed the black
blood, and wetted the ground. And the Paphlagonians great of heart,
tended him busily, and set him in a chariot, and drove him to sacred
Ilios sorrowing, and with them went his father, shedding tears, and
there was no atonement for his dead son.

Now Paris was very wroth at heart by reason of his slaying, for he had
been his host among the many Paphlagonions, wherefore, in wrath for his
sake, he let fly a bronze-shod arrow. Now there was a certain Euchenor,
the son of Polyidos the seer, a rich man and a good, whose dwelling was
in Corinth. And well he knew his own ruinous fate, when he went on
ship-board, for often would the old man, the good Polyidos, tell him,
that he must either perish of a sore disease in his halls, or go with
the ships of the Achaians, and be overcome by the Trojans. Wherefore he
avoided at once the heavy war-fine of the Achaians, and the hateful
disease, that so he might not know any anguish. This man did Paris
smite beneath the jaw and under the ear, and swiftly his spirit
departed from his limbs, and, lo, dread darkness overshadowed him.

So they fought like flaming fire, but Hector, beloved of Zeus had not
heard nor knew at all that, on the left of the ships, his host was
being subdued by the Argives, and soon would the Achaians have won
renown, so mighty was the Holder and Shaker of the earth that urged on
the Argives; yea, and himself mightily defended them. But Hector kept
where at first he had leaped within the walls and the gate, and broken
the serried ranks of shield-bearing Danaans, even where were the ships
of Aias and Protesilaos, drawn up on the beach of the hoary sea, while
above the wall was builded lowest, and thereby chiefly the heroes and
their horses were raging in battle.

There the Boiotians, and Ionians with trailing tunics, and Lokrians and
Phthians and illustrious Epeians scarcely availed to stay his onslaught
on the ships, nor yet could they drive back from them noble Hector,
like a flame of fire. And there were the picked men of the Athenians;
among them Menestheus son of Peteos was the leader; and there followed
with him Pheidas and Stichios, and brave Bias, while the Epeians were
led by Meges, son of Phyleus, and Amphion and Drakios, and in front of
the Phthians were Medon, and Podarkes resolute in war. Now the one,
Medon, was the bastard son of noble Oileus, and brother of Aias, and he
dwelt in Phylake, far from his own country, for that he had slain a
man, the brother of his stepmother Eriopis, wife of Oileus. But the
other, Podarkes, was the son of Iphiklos son of Phylakos, and they in
their armour, in the van of the great-hearted Phthians, were defending
the ships, and fighting among the Boiotians.

Now never at all did Aias, the swift son of Oileus, depart from the
side of Aias, son of Telamon, nay, not for an instant, but even as in
fallow land two wine-dark oxen with equal heart strain at the shapen
plough, and round the roots of their horns springeth up abundant sweat,
and nought sunders them but the polished yoke, as they labour through
the furrow, till the end of the furrow brings them up, so stood the two
Aiantes close by each other. Now verily did many and noble hosts of his
comrades follow with the son of Telamon, and bore his shield when
labour and sweat came upon his limbs. But the Lokrians followed not
with the high-hearted son of Oileus, for their hearts were not
steadfast in close brunt of battle, seeing that they had no helmets of
bronze, shadowy with horse-hair plumes, nor round shields, nor ashen
spears, but trusting in bows and well-twisted slings of sheep’s wool,
they followed with him to Ilios. Therewith, in the war, they shot thick
and fast, and brake the ranks of the Trojans. So the one party in front
contended with the Trojans, and with Hector arrayed in bronze, while
the others from behind kept shooting from their ambush, and the Trojans
lost all memory of the joy of battle, for the arrows confounded them.

There then right ruefully from the ships and the huts would the Trojans
have withdrawn to windy Ilios, had not Polydamas come near valiant
Hector and said: “Hector, thou art hard to be persuaded by them that
would counsel thee; for that god has given thee excellence in the works
of war, therefore in council also thou art fain to excel other men in
knowledge. But in nowise wilt thou be able to take everything on
thyself. For to one man has god given for his portion the works of war,
[to another the dance, to another the lute and song,] but in the heart
of yet another hath far-seeing Zeus placed an excellent understanding,
whereof many men get gain, yea he saveth many an one, and himself best
knoweth it. But, lo, I will speak even as it seemeth best to me. Behold
all about thee the circle of war is blazing, but the great-hearted
Trojans, now that they have got down the wall, are some with their arms
standing aloof and some are fighting, few men against a host, being
scattered among the ships. Nay, withdraw thee, and call hither all the
best of the warriors. Thereafter shall we take all counsel carefully,
whether we should fall on the ships of many benches, if indeed god
willeth to give us victory, or after counsel held, should return
unharmed from the ships. For verily I fear lest the Achaians repay
their debt of yesterday, since by the ships there tarrieth a man
insatiate of war, and never, methinks, will he wholly stand aloof from
battle.”

So spake Polydamas, and his safe counsel pleased Hector well, who spake
to him winged words and said: “Polydamas, do thou stay here all the
best of the host, but I will go thither to face the war, and swiftly
will return again, when I have straitly laid on them my commands.”

So he spake, and set forth, in semblance like a snowy mountain, and
shouting aloud he flew through the Trojans and allies. And they all
sped to Polydamas, the kindly son of Panthoos, when they heard the
voice of Hector. But he went seeking Deiphobos, and the strong prince
Helenos, and Adamas son of Asios, and Asios son of Hyrtakos, among the
warriors in the foremost line, if anywhere he might find them. But them
he found not at all unharmed, nor free of bane, but, lo, some among the
sterns of the ships of the Achaians lay lifeless, slain by the hands of
the Argives, and some were within the wall wounded by thrust or cast.
But one he readily found, on the left of the dolorous battle, goodly
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, heartening his comrades and
speeding them to war. And he drew near to him, and addressed him with
words of shame: “Thou evil Paris, fairest of face, thou that lustest
for women, thou seducer, where, prithee, are Deiphobos, and the strong
prince Helenos, and Adamas son of Asios, and Asios son of Hyrtakos, and
where is Othryoneus? Now hath all high Ilios perished utterly. Now,
too, thou seest, is sheer destruction sure.”

Then godlike Alexandros answered him again saying: “Hector, since thy
mind is to blame one that is blameless, some other day might I rather
withdraw me from the war, since my mother bare not even me wholly a
coward. For from the time that thou didst gather the battle of thy
comrades about the ships, from that hour do we abide here, and war with
the Danaans ceaselessly; and our comrades concerning whom thou
inquirest are slain. Only Deiphobos and the strong prince Helenos have
both withdrawn, both of them being wounded in the hand with long
spears, for Kronion kept death away from them. But now lead on,
wheresoever thy heart and spirit bid thee, and we will follow with thee
eagerly, nor methinks shall we lack for valour, as far as we have
strength; but beyond his strength may no man fight, howsoever eager he
be.”

So spake the hero, and persuaded his brother’s heart, and they went
forth where the war and din were thickest, round Kebriones, and noble
Polydamas, and Phalkes, and Orthaios, and godlike Polyphetes, and
Palmys, and Askanios, and Morys, son of Hippotion, who had come in
their turn, out of deep-soiled Askanie, on the morn before, and now
Zeus urged them to fight. And these set forth like the blast of violent
winds, that rushes earthward beneath the thunder of Zeus, and with
marvellous din doth mingle with the salt sea, and therein are many
swelling waves of the loud roaring sea, arched over and white with
foam, some vanward, others in the rear; even so the Trojans arrayed in
van and rear and shining with bronze, followed after their leaders.

And Hector son of Priam was leading them, the peer of Ares, the bane of
men. In front he held the circle of his shield, thick with hides, and
plates of beaten bronze, and on his temples swayed his shining helm.
And everywhere he went in advance and made trial of the ranks, if
perchance they would yield to him as he charged under cover of his
shield. But he could not confound the heart within the breast of the
Achaians. And Aias, stalking with long strides, challenged him first:
“Sir, draw nigh, wherefore dost thou vainly try to dismay the Argives?
We are in no wise ignorant of war, but by the cruel scourge of Zeus are
we Achaians vanquished. Surely now thy heart hopes utterly to spoil the
ships, but we too have hands presently to hold our own. Verily your
peopled city will long ere that beneath our hands be taken and sacked.
But for thee, I tell thee that the time is at hand, when thou shalt
pray in thy flight to Zeus, and the other immortal gods, that thy
fair-maned steeds may be fleeter than falcons: thy steeds that are to
bear thee to the city, as they storm in dust across the plain.”

And even as he spake, a bird flew forth on the right hand, an eagle of
lofty flight, and the host of the Achaians shouted thereat, encouraged
by the omen, but renowned Hector answered: “Aias, thou blundering
boaster, what sayest thou! Would that indeed I were for ever as surely
the son of aegis-bearing Zeus, and that my mother were lady Hera, and
that I were held in such honour as Apollo and Athene, as verily this
day is to bring utter evil on all the Argives! And thou among them
shalt be slain, if thou hast the heart to await my long spear, which
shall rend thy lily skin, and thou shalt glut with thy fat and flesh
the birds and dogs of the Trojans, falling among the ships of the
Achaians.”

So he spake and led the way, and they followed with wondrous din, and
the whole host shouted behind. And the Argives on the other side
answered with a shout, and forgot not their valiance, but abode the
onslaught of the bravest of the Trojans. And the cry of the two hosts
went up through the higher air, to the splendour of Zeus.



BOOK XIV.

How Sleep and Hera beguiled Zeus to slumber on the heights of Ida, and
Poseidon spurred on the Achaians to resist Hector, and how Hector was
wounded.


Yet the cry of battle escaped not Nestor, albeit at his wine, but he
spake winged words to the son of Asklepios: “Bethink thee, noble
Machaon, what had best be done; lo, louder waxes the cry of the strong
warriors by the ships. Nay, now sit where thou art, and drink the
bright wine, till Hekamede of the fair tresses shall heat warm water
for the bath, and wash away the clotted blood, but I will speedily go
forth and come to a place of outlook.”

Therewith he took the well-wrought shield of his son, horse-taming
Thrasymedes, which was lying in the hut, all glistering with bronze,
for the son had the shield of his father. And he seized a strong spear,
with a point of keen bronze, and stood outside the hut, and straightway
beheld a deed of shame, the Achaians fleeing in rout, and the
high-hearted Trojans driving them, and the wall of the Achaians was
overthrown. And as when the great sea is troubled with a dumb wave, and
dimly bodes the sudden paths of the shrill winds, but is still unmoved
nor yet rolled forward or to either side, until some steady gale comes
down from Zeus, even so the old man pondered,—his mind divided this way
and that,—whether he should fare into the press of the Danaans of the
swift steeds, or go after Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of the
host. And thus as he pondered, it seemed to him the better counsel to
go to the son of Atreus. Meanwhile they were warring and slaying each
other, and the stout bronze rang about their bodies as they were thrust
with swords and double-pointed spears.

Now the kings, the fosterlings of Zeus, encountered Nestor, as they
went up from the ships, even they that were wounded with the bronze,
Tydeus’ son, and Odysseus, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus. For far apart
from the battle were their ships drawn up, on the shore of the grey
sea, for these were the first they had drawn up to the plain, but had
builded the wall in front of the hindmost. For in no wise might the
beach, wide as it was, hold all the ships, and the host was straitened.
Wherefore they drew up the ships row within row, and filled up the wide
mouth of all the shore that the headlands held between them. Therefore
the kings were going together, leaning on their spears, to look on the
war and fray, and the heart of each was sore within his breast. And the
old man met them, even Nestor, and caused the spirit to fail within the
breasts of the Achaians.

And mighty Agamemnon spake and accosted him: “O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Achaians, wherefore dost thou come hither and hast
deserted the war, the bane of men? Lo, I fear the accomplishment of the
word that dread Hector spake, and the threat wherewith he threatened
us, speaking in the assembly of the Trojans, namely, that never would
he return to Ilios from the ships, till he had burned the ships with
fire, and slain the men. Even so he spake, and, lo, now all these
things are being fulfilled. Alas, surely even the other well-greaved
Achaians store wrath against me in their hearts, like Achilles, and
have no desire to fight by the rearmost ships.”

Then Nestor of Gerenia the knight answered him saying “Verily these
things are now at hand, and being accomplished, nor otherwise could
Zeus himself contrive them, he that thundereth on high. For, lo, the
wall is overthrown, wherein we trusted that it should be an unbroken
bulwark of the ships and of our own bodies. But let us take counsel,
how these things may best be done, if wit may do aught: but into the
war I counsel not that we should go down, for in no wise may a wounded
man do battle.”

Then Agamemnon king of men answered him again: “Nestor, for that they
are warring by the rearmost ships, and the well-builded wall hath
availed not, nor the trench, whereat the Achaians endured so much
labour, hoping in their hearts that it should be the unbroken bulwark
of the ships, and of their own bodies—such it seemeth must be the will
of Zeus supreme, [that the Achaians should perish here nameless far
from Argos]. For I knew it when he was forward to aid the Danaans, and
now I know that he is giving to the Trojans glory like that of the
blessed gods, and hath bound our hands and our strength. But come, as I
declare, let us all obey. Let us drag down the ships that are drawn up
in the first line near to the sea, and speed them all forth to the salt
sea divine, and moor them far out with stones, till the divine night
comes, if even at night the Trojans will refrain from war, and then
might we drag down all the ships. For there is no shame in fleeing from
ruin, yea, even in the night. Better doth he fare who flees from
trouble, than he that is overtaken.”

Then, looking on him sternly, spake Odysseus of many counsels: “Atreus’
son, what word hath passed the door of thy lips? Man of mischief, sure
thou shouldst lead some other inglorious army, not be king among us, to
whom Zeus hath given it, from youth even unto age, to wind the skein of
grievous wars, till every man of us perish. Art thou indeed so eager to
leave the wide-wayed city of the Trojans, the city for which we endure
with sorrow so many evils? Be silent, lest some other of the Achaians
hear this word, that no man should so much as suffer to pass through
his mouth, none that understandeth in his heart how to speak fit
counsel, none that is a sceptred king, and hath hosts obeying him so
many as the Argives over whom thou reignest. And now I wholly scorn thy
thoughts, such a word as thou hast uttered, thou that, in the midst of
war and battle, dost bid us draw down the well-timbered ships to the
sea, that even more than ever the Trojans may possess their desire,
albeit they win the mastery even now, and sheer destruction fall upon
us. For the Achaians will not make good the war, when the ships are
drawn down to the salt sea, but will look round about to flee, and
withdraw from battle. There will thy counsel work a mischief, O marshal
of the host!”

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: “Odysseus, right sharply
hast thou touched my heart with thy stern reproof: nay, I do not bid
the sons of the Achaians to drag, against their will, the well-timbered
ships to the salt sea. Now perchance there may be one who will utter a
wiser counsel than this of mine,—a young man or an old,—welcome would
it be to me.”

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake also among them: “The man is
near,—not long shall we seek him, if ye be willing to be persuaded of
me, and each of you be not resentful at all, because in years I am the
youngest among you. Nay, but I too boast me to come by lineage of a
noble sire, Tydeus, whom in Thebes the piled-up earth doth cover. For
Portheus had three well-born children, and they dwelt in Pleuron, and
steep Kalydon, even Agrios and Melas, and the third was Oineus the
knight, the father of my father, and in valour he excelled the others.
And there he abode, but my father dwelt at Argos, whither he had
wandered, for so Zeus and the other gods willed that it should be. And
he wedded one of the daughters of Adrastos, and dwelt in a house full
of livelihood, and had wheat-bearing fields enow, and many orchards of
trees apart, and many sheep were his, and in skill with the spear he
excelled all the Achaians: these things ye must have heard, if I speak
sooth. Therefore ye could not say that I am weak and a coward by
lineage, and so dishonour my spoken counsel, that well I may speak. Let
us go down to the battle, wounded as we are, since we needs must; and
then might we hold ourselves aloof from the battle, beyond the range of
darts, lest any take wound upon wound; but the others will we spur on,
even them that aforetime gave place to their passion, and stand apart,
and fight not.”

So he spake, and they all heard him readily, and obeyed him. And they
set forth, led by Agamemnon the king of men.

Now the renowned Earth-shaker held no vain watch, but went with them in
the guise of an ancient man, and he seized the right hand of Agamemnon,
Atreus’ son, and uttering winged words he spake to him, saying:
“Atreides, now methinks the ruinous heart of Achilles rejoices in his
breast, as he beholds the slaughter and flight of the Achaians, since
he hath no wisdom, not a grain. Nay, even so may he perish likewise,
and god mar him. But with thee the blessed gods are not utterly wroth,
nay, even yet methinks the leaders and rulers of the Trojans will cover
the wide plain with dust, and thyself shalt see them fleeing to the
city from the ships and the huts.”

So spake he, and shouted mightily, as he sped over the plain. And loud
as nine thousand men, or ten thousand cry in battle, when they join the
strife of war, so mighty was the cry that the strong Shaker of the
earth sent forth from his breast, and great strength he put into the
heart of each of the Achaians, to strive and war unceasingly.

Now Hera of the golden throne stood on the peak of Olympus, and saw
with her eyes, and anon knew him that was her brother and her lord’s
going to and fro through the glorious fight, and she rejoiced in her
heart. And she beheld Zeus sitting on the topmost crest of
many-fountained Ida, and to her heart he was hateful. Then she took
thought, the ox-eyed lady Hera, how she might beguile the mind of
aegis-bearing Zeus. And this seemed to her in her heart to be the best
counsel, namely to fare to Ida, when she had well adorned herself, if
perchance a sweet sleep and a kindly she could pour on his eye lids and
his crafty wits. And she set forth to her bower, that her dear son
Hephaistos had fashioned, and therein had made fast strong doors on the
pillars, with a secret bolt, that no other god might open. There did
she enter in and closed the shining doors. With ambrosia first did she
cleanse every stain from her winsome body, and anointed her with olive
oil, ambrosial, soft, and of a sweet savour; if it were but shaken, in
the bronze-floored mansion of Zeus, the savour thereof went right forth
to earth and heaven. Therewith she anointed her fair body, and combed
her hair, and with her hands plaited her shining tresses, fair and
ambrosial, flowing from her immortal head. Then she clad her in her
fragrant robe that Athene wrought delicately for her, and therein set
many things beautifully made, and fastened it over her breast with
clasps of gold. And she girdled it with a girdle arrayed with a hundred
tassels, and she set earrings in her pierced ears, earrings of three
drops, and glistering, therefrom shone grace abundantly. And with a
veil over all the peerless goddess veiled herself, a fair new veil,
bright as the sun, and beneath her shining feet she bound goodly
sandals. But when she had adorned her body with all her array, she went
forth from her bower, and called Aphrodite apart from the other gods,
and spake to her, saying: “Wilt thou obey me, dear child, in that which
I shall tell thee? or wilt thou refuse, with a grudge in thy heart,
because I succour the Danaans, and thou the Trojans?”

Then Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus answered her: “Hera, goddess queen,
daughter of mighty Kronos, say the thing that is in thy mind, my heart
bids me fulfil it, if fulfil it I may, and if it may be accomplished.”

Then with crafty purpose the lady Hera answered her: “Give me now Love
and Desire wherewith thou dost overcome all the Immortals, and mortal
men. For I am going to visit the limits of the bountiful Earth, and
Okeanos, father of the gods, and mother Tethys, who reared me well and
nourished me in their halls, having taken me from Rhea, when far-seeing
Zeus imprisoned Kronos beneath the earth and the unvintaged sea. Them
am I going to visit, and their endless strife will I loose, for already
this long time they hold apart from each other, since wrath hath
settled in their hearts. If with words I might persuade their hearts,
and bring them back to love, ever should I be called dear to them and
worshipful.”

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite answered her again: “It may not be, nor
seemly were it, to deny that thou askest, for thou steepest in the arms
of Zeus, the chief of gods.”

Therewith from her breast she loosed the broidered girdle,
fair-wrought, wherein are all her enchantments; therein are love, and
desire, and loving converse, that steals the wits even of the wise.
This girdle she laid in her hands, and spake, and said: “Lo now, take
this girdle and lay it up in thy bosom, this fair-wrought girdle,
wherein all things are fashioned; methinks thou wilt not return with
that unaccomplished, which in thy heart thou desirest.”

So spake she, and the ox-eyed lady Hera smiled, and smiling laid up the
zone within her breast.

Then the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, went to her house, and Hera,
rushing down, left the peak of Olympus, and sped’ over the snowy hills
of the Thracian horsemen, even over the topmost crests, nor grazed the
ground with her feet, and from Athos she fared across the foaming sea,
and came to Lemnos, the city of godlike Thoas. There she met Sleep, the
brother of Death, and clasped her hand in his, and spake and called him
by name: “Sleep, lord of all gods and of all men, if ever thou didst
hear my word, obey me again even now, and I will be grateful to thee
always. Lull me, I pray thee, the shining eyes of Zeus beneath his
brows. And gifts I will give to thee, even a fair throne, imperishable
for ever, a golden throne, that Hephaistos the Lame, mine own child,
shall fashion skilfully, and will set beneath it a footstool for the
feet, for thee to set thy shining feet upon, when thou art at a
festival. Nay come, and I will give thee one of the younger of the
Graces, to wed and to be called thy wife.”

So she spake, and Sleep was glad, and answered and said:—“Come now,
swear to me by the inviolable water of Styx, and with one of thy hands
grasp the bounteous earth, and with the other the shining sea, that all
may be witnesses to us, even all the gods below that are with Kronos,
that verily thou wilt give me one of the younger of the Graces, even
Pasithea, that myself do long for all my days.”

So spake he, nor did she disobey, the white-armed goddess Hera; she
sware as he bade her, and called all the gods by name, even those below
Tartaros that are called Titans. But when she had sworn and ended that
oath, the twain left the citadel of Lemnos, and of Imbros, clothed on
in mist, and swiftly they accomplished the way. To many-fountained Ida
they came, the mother of wild beasts, to Lekton, where first they left
the sea, and they twain fared above the dry land, and the topmost
forest waved beneath their feet. There Sleep halted, ere the eyes of
Zeus beheld him, and alighted on a tall pine tree, the loftiest pine
that then in all Ida rose through the nether to the upper air. But Hera
swiftly drew nigh to topmost Gargaros, the highest crest of Ida, and
Zeus the cloud-gatherer beheld her. And as he saw her, so love came
over his deep heart, and he stood before her, and spoke, and said:
“Hera, with what desire comest thou thus hither from Olympus, and thy
horses and chariot are not here, whereon thou mightst ascend?”

Then with crafty purpose lady Hera answered him: “I am going to visit
the limits of the bountiful Earth, and Okeanos, father of the gods, and
mother Tethys, who reared me well and cherished me in their halls. Them
am I going to visit, and their endless strife will I loose, for already
this long time they hold apart from each other, since wrath hath
settled in their hearts. But my horses are standing at the foot of
many-fountained Ida, my horses that shall bear me over wet and dry. And
now it is because of thee that I am thus come hither, down from
Olympus, lest perchance thou mightest be wroth with me hereafter, if
silently I were gone to the mansion of deep-flowing Okeanos.”

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, answered her and said: “Hera,
thither mayst thou go on a later day. For never once as thus did the
love of goddess or woman so mightily overflow and conquer the heart
within my breast.”

Thus slept the Father in quiet on the crest of Gargaros, by Sleep and
love overcome. But sweet Sleep started and ran to the ships of the
Achaians, to tell his tidings to the god that holdeth and shaketh the
earth. And he stood near him, and spake winged words: “Eagerly now,
Poseidon, do thou aid the Danaans, and give them glory for a little
space, while yet Zeus sleepeth, for over him have I shed soft slumber,
and Hera hath beguiled him.”

So he spake, and passed to the renowned tribes of men, and still the
more did he set on Poseidon to aid the Danaans, who straightway sprang
far afront of the foremost, and called to them: “Argives, are we again
to yield the victory to Hector, son of Priam, that he may take our
ships and win renown? Nay, even so he saith and declareth that he will
do, for that Achilles by the hollow ships abides angered at heart. But
for him there will be no such extreme regret, if we spur us on to aid
each the other. Nay come, as I command, let us all obey. Let us harness
us in the best shields that are in the host, and the greatest, and
cover our heads with shining helms, and take the longest spears in our
hands, and so go forth. Yea, and I will lead the way, and methinks that
Hector, son of Priam, will not long await us, for all his eagerness.
And whatsoever man is steadfast in battle, and hath a small buckler on
his shoulder, let him give it to a worse man, and harness him in a
larger shield.”

So spake he, and they heard him eagerly and obeyed him. And them the
kings themselves arrayed, wounded as they were, Tydeus’ son, and
Odysseus, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus. They went through all the host,
and made exchange of weapons of war. The good arms did the good warrior
harness him in, the worse he gave to the worse. But when they had done
on the shining bronze about their bodies, they started on the march,
and Poseidon led them, the Shaker of the earth, with a dread sword of
fine edge in his strong hand, like unto lightning; wherewith it is not
permitted that any should mingle in woful war, but fear holds men afar
therefrom. But the Trojans on the other side was renowned Hector
arraying. Then did they now strain the fiercest strife of war, even
dark-haired Poseidon and glorious Hector, one succouring the Trojans,
the other with the Argives. And the sea washed up to the huts and ships
of the Argives, and they gathered together with a mighty cry. Not so
loudly bellows the wave of the sea against the land, stirred up from
the deep by the harsh breath of the north wind, nor so loud is the roar
of burning fire in the glades of a mountain, when it springs to burn up
the forest, nor calls the wind so loudly in the high leafy tresses of
the trees, when it rages and roars its loudest, as then was the cry of
the Trojans and Achaians, shouting dreadfully as they rushed upon each
other.

First glorious Hector cast with his spear at Aias, who was facing him
full, and did not miss, striking him where two belts were stretched
across his breast, the belt of his shield, and of his silver-studded
sword; these guarded his tender flesh. And Hector was enraged because
his swift spear had flown vainly from his hand, and he retreated into
the throng of his fellows, avoiding Fate.

Then as he was departing the great Telamonian Aias smote him with a
huge stone; for many stones, the props of swift ships, were rolled
among the feet of the fighters; one of these he lifted, and smote
Hector on the breast, over the shield-rim, near the neck, and made him
spin like a top with the blow, that he reeled round and round. And even
as when an oak falls uprooted beneath the stroke of father Zeus, and a
dread savour of brimstone arises therefrom, and whoso stands near and
beholds it has no more courage, for dread is the bolt of great Zeus,
even so fell mighty Hector straightway in the dust. And the spear fell
from his hand, but his shield and helm were made fast to him, and round
him rang his arms adorned with bronze.

Then with a loud cry they ran up, the sons of the Achaians, hoping to
drag him away, and they cast showers of darts. But not one availed to
wound or smite the shepherd of the host, before that might be the
bravest gathered about him, Polydamas, and Aineias, and goodly Agenor,
and Sarpedon, leader of the Lykians, and noble Glaukos, and of the rest
not one was heedless of him, but they held their round shields in front
of him, and his comrades lifted him in their arms, and bare him out of
the battle, till he reached his swift horses that were standing waiting
for him, with the charioteer and the fair-dight chariot at the rear of
the combat and the war. These toward the city bore him heavily moaning.
Now when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, of eddying
Xanthos, that immortal Zeus begat, there they lifted him from the
chariot to the ground, and poured water over him, and he gat back his
breath, and looked up with his eyes, and sitting on his heels kneeling,
he vomited black blood. Then again he sank back on the ground, and
black night covered his eyes, the stroke still conquering his spirit.



BOOK XV.

Zeus awakening, biddeth Apollo revive Hector, and restore the fortunes
of the Trojans. Fire is thrown on the ship of Protesilaos.


Now when they had sped in flight across the palisade and trench, and
many were overcome at the hands of the Danaans, the rest were stayed,
and abode beside the chariots in confusion, and pale with terror, and
Zeus awoke, on the peaks of Ida, beside Hera of the golden throne. Then
he leaped up, and stood, and beheld the Trojans and Achaians, those in
flight, and these driving them on from the rear, even the Argives, and
among them the prince Poseidon. And Hector he saw lying on the plain,
and around him sat his comrades, and he was gasping with difficult
breath, and his mind wandering, and was vomiting blood, for it was not
the weakest of the Achaians that had smitten him. Beholding him, the
father of men and gods had pity on him, and terribly he spoke to Hera,
with fierce look: “O thou ill to deal with, Hera, verily it is thy
crafty wile that has made noble Hector cease from the fight, and has
terrified the host. Nay, but yet I know not whether thou mayst not be
the first to reap the fruits of thy cruel treason, and I beat thee with
stripes. Dost thou not remember, when thou wert hung from on high, and
from thy feet I suspended two anvils, and round thy hands fastened a
golden bond that might not be broken? And thou didst hang in the clear
air and the clouds, and the gods were wroth in high Olympus, but they
could not come round and unloose thee.”

So spake he, and the ox-eyed lady Hera shuddered, and spake unto him
winged words, saying: “Let earth now be witness hereto, and wide heaven
above, and that falling water of Styx, the greatest oath and the most
terrible to the blessed gods, and thine own sacred head, and our own
bridal bed, whereby never would I forswear myself, that not by my will
does earth-shaking Poseidon trouble the Trojans and Hector, and succour
them of the other part. Nay, it is his own soul that urgeth and
commandeth him, and he had pity on the Achaians, when he beheld them
hard pressed beside the ships. I would even counsel him also to go even
where thou, lord of the storm-cloud, mayst lead him.”

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and answering her
he spake winged words: “If thou, of a truth, O ox-eyed lady Hera,
wouldst hereafter abide of one mind with me among the immortal gods,
thereon would Poseidon, howsoever much his wish be contrariwise,
quickly turn his mind otherwhere, after thy heart and mine. But if
indeed thou speakest the truth and soothly, go thou now among the
tribes of the gods, and call Iris to come hither, and Apollo, the
renowned archer, that Iris may go among the host of mail-clad Achaians
and tell Poseidon the prince to cease from the war, and get him unto
his own house. But let Phoebus Apollo spur Hector on to the war, and
breathe strength into him again, and make him forget his anguish, that
now wears down his heart, and drive the Achaians back again, when he
hath stirred in them craven fear. Let them flee and fall among the
many-benched ships of Achilles son of Peleus, and he shall rouse his
own comrade, Patroklos; and him shall renowned Hector slay with the
spear, in front of Ilios, after that he has slain many other youths,
and among them my son, noble Sarpedon. In wrath therefor shall goodly
Achilles slay Hector. From that hour verily will I cause a new pursuit
from the ships, that shall endure continually, even until the Achaians
take steep Ilios, through the counsels of Athene. But before that hour
neither do I cease in my wrath, nor will I suffer any other of the
Immortals to help the Danaans there, before I accomplish that desire of
the son of Peleus, as I promised him at the first, and confirmed the
same with a nod of my head, on that day when the goddess Thetis clasped
my knees, imploring me to honour Achilles, the sacker of cities.”

So spake he, nor did the white-armed goddess Hera disobey him, and she
sped down from the hills of Ida to high Olympus, and went among the
gathering of the immortal gods. And she called Apollo without the hall
and Iris, that is the messenger of the immortal gods, and she spake
winged words, and addressed them, saying: “Zeus bids you go to Ida as
swiftly as may be, and when ye have gone, and looked on the face of
Zeus, do ye whatsoever he shall order and command.”

And these twain came before the face of Zeus the cloud gatherer, and
stood there, and he was nowise displeased at heart when he beheld them,
for that speedily they had obeyed the words of his dear wife. And to
Iris first he spake winged words: “Go, get thee, swift Iris, to the
prince Poseidon, and tell him all these things, nor be a false
messenger. Command him to cease from war and battle, and to go among
the tribes of the gods, or into the bright sea. But if he will not obey
my words, but will hold me in no regard, then let him consider in his
heart and mind, lest he dare not for all his strength to abide me when
I come against him, since I deem me to be far mightier than he, and
elder born.”

So spake he, nor did the wind-footed fleet Iris disobey him, but went
down the hills of Ida to sacred Ilios. And as when snow or chill hail
fleets from the clouds beneath the stress of the North Wind born in the
clear air, so fleetly she fled in her eagerness, swift Iris, and drew
near the renowned Earth-shaker and spake to him the message of Zeus.
And he left the host of the Achaians, and passed to the sea, and sank,
and sorely they missed him, the heroes of the Achaians.

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, spake to Apollo, saying: “Go
now, dear Phoebus, to Hector of the helm of bronze. Let glorious Hector
be thy care, and rouse in him great wrath even till the Achaians come
in their flight to the ships, and the Hellespont. And from that moment
will I devise word and deed wherewithal the Achaians may take breath
again from their toil.”

So spake he, nor was Apollo deaf to the word of the Father, but he went
down the hills of Ida like a fleet falcon, the bane of doves, that is
the swiftest of flying things. And he found the son of wise-hearted
Priam, noble Hector, sitting up, no longer lying, for he had but late
got back his life, and knew the comrades around him, and his gasping
and his sweat had ceased, from the moment when the will of
aegis-bearing Zeus began to revive him. Then far-darting Apollo stood
near him, and spake to him: “Hector, son of Priam, why dost thou sit
fainting apart from the others? Is it perchance that some trouble
cometh upon thee?”

Then, with faint breath answered him Hector of the glancing helm: “Nay,
but who art thou, best of the gods, who enquirest of me face to face?
Dost thou not know that by the hindmost row of the ships of the
Achaians, Aias of the loud war-cry smote me on the breast with a stone,
as I was slaying his comrades, and made me cease from mine impetuous
might? And verily I deemed that this very day I should pass to the
dead, and the house of Hades, when I had gasped my life away.”

Then prince Apollo the Far-darter answered him again: “Take courage
now, so great an ally hath the son of Kronos sent thee out of Ida, to
stand by thee and defend thee, even Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword,
me who of old defend thee, thyself and the steep citadel. But come now,
bid thy many charioteers drive their swift steeds against the hollow
ships, and I will go before and make smooth all the way for the
chariots, and will put to flight the Achaian heroes.”

So he spake, and breathed great might into the shepherd of the host,
and even as when a stalled horse, full fed at the manger, breaks his
tether and speedeth at the gallop over the plain exultingly, being wont
to bathe in the fair-flowing stream, and holds his head on high, and
the mane floweth about his shoulders, and he trusteth in his glory, and
nimbly his knees bear him to the haunts and pasture of the mares, even
so Hector lightly moved his feet and knees, urging on his horsemen,
when he heard the voice of the god. But as when hounds and country folk
pursue a horned stag, or a wild goat, that steep rock and shady wood
save from them, nor is it their lot to find him, but at their clamour a
bearded lion hath shown himself on the way, and lightly turned them all
despite their eagerness, even so the Danaans for a while followed on
always in their companies, smiting with swords and double-pointed
spears, but when they saw Hector going up and down the ranks of men,
then were they afraid, and the hearts of all fell to their feet.

Then to them spake Thoas, son of Andraimon, far the best of the
Aitolians, skilled in throwing the dart, and good in close fight, and
in council did few of the Achaians surpass him, when the young men were
striving in debate; he made harangue and spake among them: “Alas, and
verily a great marvel is this I behold with mine eyes, how he hath
again arisen, and hath avoided the Fates, even Hector. Surely each of
us hoped in his heart, that he had died beneath the hand of Aias, son
of Telamon. But some one of the gods again hath delivered and saved
Hector, who verily hath loosened the knees of many of the Danaans, as
methinks will befall even now, for not without the will of
loud-thundering Zeus doth he rise in the front ranks, thus eager for
battle. But come, as I declare let us all obey. Let us bid the throng
turn back to the ships, but let us as many as avow us to be the best in
the host, take our stand, if perchance first we may meet him, and hold
him off with outstretched spears, and he, methinks, for all his
eagerness, will fear at heart to enter into the press of the Danaans.”

So spake he, and they heard him eagerly, and obeyed him. They that were
with Aias and the prince Idomeneus, and Teukros, and Neriones, and
Meges the peer of Ares, called to all the best of the warriors and
sustained the fight with Hector and the Trojans, but behind them the
multitude returned to the ships of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans drave forward in close ranks, and with long strides
Hector led them, while in front of him went Phoebus Apollo, his
shoulders wrapped in cloud, and still he held the fell aegis, dread,
circled with a shaggy fringe, and gleaming, that Hephaistos the smith
gave to Zeus, to bear for the terror of men; with this in his hands did
he lead the host.

Now the Argives abode them in close ranks, and shrill the cry arose on
both sides, and the arrows leaped from the bow-strings, and many spears
from stalwart hands, whereof some stood fast in the flesh of young men
swift in fight, but many halfway, ere ever they reached the white
flesh, stuck in the ground, longing to glut themselves with flesh. Now
so long as Phoebus Apollo held the aegis unmoved in his hands, so long
the darts smote either side amain, and the folk fell. But when he
looked face to face on the Danaans of the swift steeds, and shook the
aegis, and himself shouted mightily, he quelled their heart in their
breast, and they forgot their impetuous valour. And as when two wild
beasts drive in confusion a herd of kine, or a great flock of sheep, in
the dark hour of black night, coming swiftly on them when the herdsman
is not by, even so were the Achaians terror-stricken and strengthless,
for Apollo sent a panic among them, but still gave renown to the
Trojans and Hector.

And Hector smote his horses on the shoulder with the lash, and called
aloud on the Trojans along the ranks. And they all cried out, and level
with his held the steeds that drew their chariots, with a marvellous
din, and in front of them Phoebus Apollo lightly dashed down with his
feet the banks of the deep ditch, and cast them into the midst thereof,
making a bridgeway long and wide as is a spear-cast, when a man throws
to make trial of his strength. Thereby the Trojans poured forward in
their battalions, while in their van Apollo held the splendid aegis.
And most easily did he cast down the wall of the Achaians, as when a
boy scatters the sand beside the sea, first making sand buildings for
sport in his childishness, and then again, in his sport, confounding
them with his feet and hands; even so didst thou, archer Apollo,
confound the long toil and labour of the Argives, and among them rouse
a panic fear.

So they were halting, and abiding by the ships, calling each to other;
and lifting their hands to all the gods did each man pray vehemently,
and chiefly prayed Nestor, the Warden of the Achaians, stretching his
hand towards the starry heaven: “O father Zeus, if ever any one of us
in wheat-bearing Argos did burn to thee fat thighs of bull or sheep,
and prayed that he might return, and thou didst promise and assent
thereto, of these things be thou mindful, and avert, Olympian, the
pitiless day, nor suffer the Trojans thus to overcome the Achaians.”

So spake he in his prayer, and Zeus, the Lord of counsel, thundered
loudly, hearing the prayers of the ancient son of Neleus.

But the Trojans when they heard the thunder of aegis-bearing Zeus,
rushed yet the more eagerly upon the Argives, and were mindful of the
joy of battle. And as when a great wave of the wide sea sweeps over the
bulwarks of a ship, the might of the wind constraining it, which
chiefly swells the waves, even so did the Trojans with a great cry
bound over the wall, and drave their horses on, and at the hindmost row
of the ships were fighting hand to hand with double-pointed spears, the
Trojans from the chariots, but the Achaians climbing up aloft, from the
black ships with long pikes that they had lying in the ships for battle
at sea, jointed pikes shod at the head with bronze.

Now the Trojans, like ravening lions, rushed upon the ships, fulfilling
the behests of Zeus, that ever was rousing their great wrath, but
softened the temper of the Argives, and took away their glory, while he
spurred on the others. For the heart of Zeus was set on giving glory to
Hector, the son of Priam, that withal he might cast fierce-blazing
fire, unwearied, upon the beaked ships, and so fulfil all the
presumptuous prayer of Thetis; wherefore wise-counselling Zeus awaited,
till his eyes should see the glare of a burning ship. For even from
that hour was he to ordain the backward chase of the Trojans from the
ships, and to give glory to the Danaans. With this design was he
rousing Hector, Priam’s son, that himself was right eager, against the
hollow ships. For short of life was he to be, yea, and already Pallas
Athene was urging against him the day of destiny, at the hand of the
son of Peleus. And fain he was to break the ranks of men, trying them
wheresoever he saw the thickest press, and the goodliest harness. Yet
not even so might he break them for all his eagerness. Nay, they stood
firm, and embattled like a steep rock and a great, hard by the hoary
sea, a rock that abides the swift paths of the shrill winds, and the
swelling waves that roar against it. Even so the Danaans steadfastly
abode the Trojans and fled not away. But Hector shining with fire on
all sides leaped on the throng, and fell upon them, as when beneath the
storm-clouds a fleet wave reared of the winds falls on a swift ship,
and she is all hidden with foam, and the dread blast of the wind roars
against the sail, and the sailors fear, and tremble in their hearts,
for by but a little way are they borne forth from death, even so the
spirit was torn in the breasts of the Achaians.

So again keen battle was set by the ships. Thou wouldst deem that
unwearied and unworn they met each other in war, so eagerly they
fought. And in their striving they were minded thus; the Achaians
verily deemed that never would they flee from the danger, but perish
there, but the heart of each Trojan hoped in his breast, that they
should fire the ships, and slay the heroes of the Achaians. With these
imaginations they stood to each other, and Hector seized the stern of a
seafaring ship, a fair ship, swift on the brine, that had borne
Protesilaos to Troia, but brought him not back again to his own
country. Now round his ship the Achaians and Trojans warred on each
other hand to hand, nor far apart did they endure the flights of
arrows, nor of darts, but standing hard each by other, with one heart,
with sharp axes and hatchets they fought, and with great swords, and
double-pointed spears. And many fair brands, dark-scabbarded and
hilted, fell to the ground, some from the hands, some from off the
shoulders of warring men, and the black earth ran with blood. But
Hector, after that once he had seized the ship’s stern, left not his
hold, keeping the ensign in his hands, and he called to the Trojans:
“Bring fire, and all with one voice do ye raise the war-cry; now hath
Zeus given us the dearest day of all,—to take the ships that came
hither against the will of the gods, and brought many woes upon us, by
the cowardice of the elders, who withheld me when I was eager to fight
at the sterns of the ships, and kept back the host. But if even then
far-seeing Zeus did harm our wits, now he himself doth urge and command
us onwards.” So spake he, and they set yet the fiercer on the Argives.
And Aias no longer abode their onset, for he was driven back by the
darts, but he withdrew a little,—thinking that now he should die,—on to
the oarsmal’s bench of seven feet long, and he left the decks of the
trim ship. There then he stood on the watch, and with his spear he ever
drave the Trojans from the ships, whosoever brought unwearied fire, and
ever he shouted terribly, calling to the Danaans: “O friends, Danaan
heroes, men of Ares’ company, play the man, my friends, and be mindful
of impetuous valour. Do we deem that there be allies at our backs, or
some wall stronger than this to ward off death from men? Verily there
is not hard by any city arrayed with towers, whereby we might defend
ourselves, having a host that could turn the balance of battle. Nay,
but we are set down in the plain of the mailed men of Troy, with our
backs against the sea, and far off from our own land. Therefore is
safety in battle, and not in slackening from the fight.” So spake he,
and rushed on ravening for battle, with his keen spear. And whosoever
of the Trojans was coming against the ship with blazing fire, to
pleasure Hector at his urging, him would Aias wound, awaiting him with
his long spear, and twelve men in front of the ships at close quarters
did he wound.



BOOK XVI.

How Patroklos fought in the armour of Achilles, and drove the Trojans
from the ships, but was slain at last by Hector.


So they were warring round the well-timbered ship, but Patroklos drew
near Achilles, shepherd of the host, and he shed warm tears, even as a
fountain of dark water that down a steep cliff pours its cloudy stream.
And noble swift-footed Achilles when he beheld him was grieved for his
sake, and accosted him, and spake winged words, saying: “Wherefore
weepest thou, Patroklos, like a fond little maid, that runs by her
mother’s side, and bids her mother take her up, snatching at her gown,
and hinders her in her going, and tearfully looks at her, till the
mother takes her up? like her, Patroklos, dost thou let fall soft
tears. Hast thou aught to tell to the Myrmidons, or to me myself, or is
it some tidings out of Phthia that thou alone hast beard? Or dost thou
lament for the sake of the Argives,—how they perish by the hollow ships
through their own transgression? Speak out, and hide it not within thy
spirit, that we may both know all.”

But with a heavy groan didst thou speak unto him, O knight Patroklos:
“O Achilles, son of Peleus, far the bravest of the Achaians, be not
wroth, seeing that so great calamity has beset the Achaians. For verily
all of them that aforetime were the best are lying among the ships,
smitten and wounded. Smitten is the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes, and
wounded is Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon; and smitten is
Eurypylos on the thigh with an arrow. And about them the leeches
skilled in medicines are busy, healing their wounds, but thou art hard
to reconcile, Achilles. Never then may such wrath take hold of me as
that thou nursest; thou brave to the hurting of others. What other men
later born shall have profit of thee, if thou dost not ward off base
ruin from the Argives? Pitiless that thou art, the knight Peleus was
not then thy father, nor Thetis thy mother, but the grey sea bare thee,
and the sheer cliffs, so untoward is thy spirit. But if in thy heart
thou art shunning some oracle, and thy lady mother hath told thee
somewhat from Zeus, yet me do thou send forth quickly, and make the
rest of the host of the Myrmidons follow me, if yet any light may arise
from me to the Danaans. And give me thy harness to buckle about my
shoulders, if perchance the Trojans may take me for thee, and so
abstain from battle, and the warlike sons of the Achaians may take
breath, wearied as they be, for brief is the breathing in war. And
lightly might we that are fresh drive men wearied with the battle back
to the citadel, away from the ships and the huts.”

So he spake and besought him, in his unwittingness, for truly it was to
be his own evil death and fate that he prayed for. Then to him in great
heaviness spake swift-footed Achilles: “Ah me, Patroklos of the seed of
Zeus, what word hast thou spoken? Neither take I heed of any oracle
that I wot of, nor yet has my lady mother told me somewhat from Zeus,
but this dread sorrow comes upon my heart and spirit, from the hour
that a man wishes to rob me who am his equal, and to take away my
prize, for that he excels me in power. A dread sorrow to me is this,
after all the toils that my heart hath endured. The maiden that the
sons of the Achaians chose out for me as my prize, and that I won with
my spear when I sacked a well-walled city, her has mighty Agamemnon the
son of Atreus taken back out of my hands, as though I were but some
sojourner dishonourable. But we will let bygones be bygones. No man may
be angry of heart for ever, yet verily I said that I would not cease
from my wrath, until that time when to mine own ships should come the
war-cry and the battle. But do thou on thy shoulders my famous harness,
and lead the war-loving Myrmidons to the fight, to ward off destruction
from the ships, lest they even burn the ships with blazing fire, and
take away our desired return. But when thou hast driven them from the
ships, return, and even if the loud-thundering lord of Hera grant thee
to win glory, yet long not thou apart from me to fight with the
war-loving Trojans; thereby wilt thou minish mine honour. Neither do
thou, exulting in war and strife, and slaying the Trojans, lead on
toward Ilios, lest one of the eternal gods from Olympus come against
thee; right dearly doth Apollo the Far-darter love them. Nay, return
back when thou halt brought safety to the ships, and suffer the rest to
fight along the plain. For would, O father Zeus, and Athene, and
Apollo, would that not one of all the Trojans might escape death, nor
one of the Argives, but that we twain might avoid destruction, that
alone we might undo the sacred coronal of Troy.”

So spake they each to other, but Aias no longer abode the onset, for he
was overpowered by darts; the counsel of Zeus was subduing him, and the
shafts of the proud Trojans; and his bright helmet, being smitten, kept
ringing terribly about his temples: for always it was smitten upon the
fair-wrought cheek-pieces. Moreover his left shoulder was wearied, as
steadfastly he held up his glittering shield, nor yet could they make
him give ground, as they pressed on with their darts around him. And
ever he was worn out with difficult breath, and much sweat kept running
from all his limbs, nor had he a moment to draw breath, so on all sides
was evil heaped on evil.

Tell me now, ye Muses that have mansions in Olympus, how first fire
fell on the ships of the Achaians. Hector drew near, and the ashen
spear of Aias he smote with his great sword, hard by the socket, behind
the point, and shore it clean away, and the son of Telamon brandished
in his hand no more than a pointless spear, and far from him the head
of bronze fell ringing on the ground.

And Aias knew in his noble heart, and shuddered at the deeds of the
gods, even how Zeus that thundereth on high did utterly cut off from
him avail in war, and desired victory for the Trojans. Then Aias gave
back out of the darts. But the Trojans cast on the swift ship
unwearying fire, and instantly the inextinguishable flame streamed over
her: so the fire begirt the stern, whereon Achilles smote his thighs,
and spake to Patroklos: “Arise, Patroklos of the seed of Zeus,
commander of the horsemen, for truly I see by the ships the rush of the
consuming fire. Up then, lest they take the ships, and there be no more
retreat; do on thy harness speedily, and I will summon the host.”

So spake he, while Patroklos was harnessing him in shining bronze. His
goodly greaves, fitted with silver clasps, he first girt round his
legs, and next did on around his breast the well-dight starry corslet
of the swift-footed son of Aiakos. And round his shoulders he cast a
sword of bronze, with studs of silver, and next took the great and
mighty shield, and on his proud head set a well-wrought helm with a
horse-hair crest, and terribly nodded the crest from above. Then seized
he two strong lances that fitted his grasp, only he took not the spear
of the noble son of Aiakos, heavy, and huge, and stalwart, that none
other of the Achaians could wield. And Patroklos bade Automedon to yoke
the horses speedily, even Automedon whom most he honoured after
Achilles, the breaker of the ranks of men, and whom he held trustiest
in battle to abide his call. And for him Automedon led beneath the yoke
the swift horses, Xanthos and Balios, that fly as swift as the winds,
the horses that the harpy Podarge bare to the West Wind, as she grazed
on the meadow by the stream of Okeanos. And in the side-traces he put
the goodly Pedasos, that Achilles carried away, when he took the city
of Eetion; and being but a mortal steed, he followed with the immortal
horses.

Meanwhile Achilles went and harnessed all the Myrmidons in the huts
with armour, and they gathered like ravening wolves with strength in
their hearts unspeakable. And among them all stood warlike Achilles
urging on the horses and the targeteers. And he aroused the heart and
valour of each of them, and the ranks were yet the closer serried when
they heard the prince. And as when a man builds the wall of a high
house with close-set stones, to avoid the might of the winds, even so
close were arrayed the helmets and bossy shields, and shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man, and the horse-hair crests on the
bright helmet-ridges touched each other when they nodded, so close they
stood by each other.

And straightway they poured forth like wasps that have their dwelling
by the wayside, and that boys are ever wont to vex, always tormenting
them in their nests beside the way in childish sport, and a common evil
they make for many. With heart and spirit like theirs the Myrmidons
poured out now from the ships, and a cry arose unquenchable, and
Patroklos called on his comrades, shouting aloud: “Myrmidons, ye
comrades of Achilles son of Peleus, be men, my friends, and be mindful
of your impetuous valour, that so we may win honour for the son of
Peleus, that is far the bravest of the Argives by the ships, and whose
close-fighting squires are the best. And let wide-ruling Agamemnon the
son of Atreus learn his own blindness of heart, in that he nothing
honoured the best of the Achaians.”

So spake he, and aroused each mal’s heart and courage, and all in a
mass they fell on the Trojans, and the ships around echoed wondrously
to the cry of the Achaians. But when the Trojans beheld the strong son
of Menoitios, himself and his squire, shining in their armour, the
heart was stirred in all of them, and the companies wavered, for they
deemed that by the ships the swift-footed son of Peleus had cast away
his wrath, and chosen reconcilement: then each man glanced round, to
see where he might flee sheer destruction.

But Patroklos first with a shining spear cast straight into the press,
where most men were thronging, even by the stern of the ship of
great-hearted Protesilaos, and he smote Pyraichmes, who led his
Paionian horsemen out of Amydon, from the wide water of Axios; him he
smote on the right shoulder, and he fell on his back in the dust with a
groan, and his comrades around him, the Paionians, were afraid, for
Patroklos sent fear among them all, when he slew their leader that was
ever the best in fight. Then he drove them out from the ships, and
quenched the burning fire. And the half-burnt ship was left there, and
the Trojans fled, with a marvellous din, and the Danaans poured in
among the hollow ships, and ceaseless was the shouting. And as when
from the high crest of a great hill Zeus, the gatherer of the
lightning, hath stirred a dense cloud, and forth shine all the peaks,
and sharp promontories, and glades, and from heaven the infinite air
breaks open, even so the Danaans, having driven the blazing fire from
the ships, for a little while took breath, but there was no pause in
the battle. For not yet were the Trojans driven in utter rout by the
Achaians, dear to Ares, from the black ships, but they still stood up
against them, and only perforce gave ground from the ships. But even as
robber wolves fall on the lambs or kids, choosing them out of the
herds, when they are scattered on hills by the witlessness of the
shepherd, and the wolves behold it, and speedily harry the younglings
that have no heart of courage,—even so the Danaans fell on the Trojans,
and they were mindful of ill-sounding flight, and forgot their
impetuous valour.

But that great Aias ever was fain to cast his spear at Hector of the
helm of bronze, but he, in his cunning of war, covered his broad
shoulders with his shield of bulls’ hide, and watched the hurtling of
the arrows, and the noise of spears. And verily well he knew the change
in the mastery of war, but even so he abode, and was striving to rescue
his trusty comrades.

And as when from Olympus a cloud fares into heaven, from the sacred
air, when Zeus spreadeth forth the tempest, even so from the ships came
the war-cry and the rout, nor in order due did they cross the ditch
again. But his swift-footed horses bare Hector forth with his arms, and
he left the host of Troy, whom the delved trench restrained against
their will. And in the trench did many swift steeds that draw the car
break the fore-part of the pole, and leave the chariots of their
masters.

But Patroklos followed after, crying fiercely to the Danaans, and full
of evil will against the Trojans, while they with cries and flight
filled all the ways, for they were scattered, and on high the storm of
dust was scattered below the clouds, and the whole-hooved horses
strained back towards the city, away from the ships and the huts.

But even where Patroklos saw the folk thickest in the rout, thither did
he guide his horses with a cry, and under his axle-trees men fell prone
from their chariots, and the cars were overturned with a din of
shattering. But straight over the ditch, in forward flight, leaped the
swift horses. And the heart of Patroklos urged him against Hector, for
he was eager to smite him, but his swift steeds bore Hector forth and
away. And even as beneath a tempest the whole black earth is oppressed,
on an autumn day, when Zeus pours forth rain most vehemently, and all
the rivers run full, and many a scaur the torrents tear away, and down
to the dark sea they rush headlong from the hills, roaring mightily,
and minished are the works of men, even so mighty was the roar of the
Trojan horses as they ran.

Now Patroklos when he had cloven the nearest companies, drave them
backward again to the ships, nor suffered them to approach the city,
despite their desire, but between the ships, and the river, and the
lofty wall, he rushed on them, and slew them, and avenged many a
comrade slain. There first he smote Pronoos with a shining spear, where
the shield left bare the breast, and loosened his limbs, and he fell
with a crash. Then Thestor the son of Enops he next assailed, as he sat
crouching in the polished chariot, for he was struck distraught, and
the reins flew from his hands. Him he drew near, and smote with the
lance on the right jaw, and clean pierced through his teeth. And
Patroklos caught hold of the spear and dragged him over the rim of the
car, as when a man sits on a jutting rock, and drags a sacred fish
forth from the sea, with line and glittering hook of bronze; so on the
bright spear dragged he Thestor gaping from the chariot, and cast him
down on his face and life left him as he fell. Next, as Euryalos came
on, he smote him on the midst of the head with a stone, and all his
head was shattered within the strong helmet, and prone on the earth he
fell, and death that slayeth the spirit overwhelmed him. Next Erymas,
and Amphoteros, and Epaltes and Tlepolemos son of Damastor, and Echios
and Pyris, and Ipheus and Euippos, and Polymelos son of Argeas, all
these in turn he brought low to the bounteous earth. But when Sarpedon
beheld his comrades with ungirdled doublets, subdued beneath the hands
of Patroklos son of Menoitios, he cried aloud, upbraiding the godlike
Lykians: “Shame, ye Lykians, whither do ye flee? Now be ye strong, for
I will encounter this man that I may know who he is that conquers here,
and verily many evils hath he wrought the Trojans, in that he hath
loosened the knees of many men and noble.”

So spake he, and leaped with his arms from the chariot to the ground.
But Patroklos, on the other side, when he beheld him leaped from his
chariot. And they, like vultures of crooked talons and curved beaks,
that war with loud yells on some high cliff, even so they rushed with
cries against each other. And beholding then the son of Kronos of the
crooked counsels took pity on them, and he spake to Hera, his sister
and wife: “Ah woe is me for that it is fated that Sarpedon, the
best-beloved of men to me, shall be subdued under Patroklos son of
Menoitios. And in two ways my heart within my breast is divided, as I
ponder whether I should catch him up alive out of the tearful war, and
set him down in the rich land of Lykia, or whether I should now subdue
him beneath the hands of the son of Menoitios.”

Then the ox-eyed lady Hera made answer to him: “Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? A mortal man long doomed to
fate dost thou desire to deliver again from death of evil name? Work
thy will, but all we other gods will in no wise praise thee. And
another thing I will tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thy heart; if
thou dost send Sarpedon living to his own house, consider lest thereon
some other god likewise desire to send his own dear son away out of the
strong battle. For round the great citadel of Priam war many sons of
the Immortals, and among the Immortals wilt thou send terrible wrath.
But if he be dear to thee, and thy heart mourns for him, truly then
suffer him to be subdued in the strong battle beneath the hands of
Patroklos son of Menoitios, but when his soul and life leave that
warrior, send Death and sweet Sleep to bear him, even till they come to
the land of wide Lykia, there will his kindred and friends bury him,
with a barrow and a pillar, for this is the due of the dead.”

So spake she, nor did the father of gods and men disregard her. But he
shed bloody raindrops on the earth, honouring his dear son, that
Patroklos was about to slay in the deep-soiled land of Troia, far off
from his own country. Now when they were come near each other in onset,
there verily did Patroklos smite the renowned Thrasymelos, the good
squire of the prince Sarpedon, on the lower part of the belly, and
loosened his limbs. But Sarpedon missed him with his shining javelin,
as he in turn rushed on, but wounded the horse Pedasos on the right
shoulder with the spear, and he shrieked as he breathed his life away,
and fell crying in the dust, and his spirit fled from him. But the
other twain reared this way and that, and the yoke creaked, and the
reins were confused on them, when their trace-horse lay in the dust.
But thereof did Automedon, the spearman renowned, find a remedy, and
drawing his long-edged sword from his stout thigh, he leaped forth, and
cut adrift the horse, with no delay, and the pair righted themselves,
and strained in the reins, and they met again in life-devouring war.

Then again Sarpedon missed with his shining dart, and the point of the
spear flew over the left shoulder of Patroklos and smote him not, but
he in turn arose with the bronze, and his javelin flew not vainly from
his hand, but struck Sarpedon even where the midriff clasps the beating
heart. And he fell as falls an oak, or a silver poplar, or a slim pine
tree, that on the hills the shipwrights fell with whetted axes, to be
timber for ship-building; even so before the horses and chariot he lay
at length, moaning aloud, and clutching at the bloody dust. And as when
a lion hath fallen on a herd, and slain a bull, tawny and high of
heart, among the kine of trailing gait, and he perishes groaning
beneath the claws of the lion, even so under Patroklos did the leader
of the Lykian shieldmen rage, even in death, and he called to his dear
comrade: “Dear Glaukos, warrior among warlike men, now most doth it
behove thee to be a spearman, and a hardy fighter: now let baneful war
be dear to thee, if indeed thou art a man of might. First fare all
about and urge on the heroes that be leaders of the Lykians, to fight
for Sarpedon, and thereafter thyself do battle for me with the sword.
For to thee even in time to come shall I be shame and disgrace for
ever, all thy days, if the Achaians strip me of mine armour, fallen in
the gathering of the ships. Nay, hold out manfully, and spur on all the
host.”

Even as he spake thus, the end of death veiled over his eyes and his
nostrils, but Patroklos, setting foot on his breast drew the spear out
of his flesh, and the midriff followed with the spear, so that he drew
forth together the spear point, and the soul of Sarpedon; and the
Myrmidons held there his panting steeds, eager to fly afar, since the
chariot was reft of its lords.

Then dread sorrow came on Glaukos, when he heard the voice of Sarpedon,
and his heart was stirred, that he availed not to succour him. And with
his hand he caught and held his arm, for the wound galled him, the
wound of the arrow wherewith, as he pressed on towards the lofty wall,
Teukros had smitten him, warding off destruction from his fellows. Then
in prayer spake Glaukos to far-darting Apollo: “Hear, O Prince that art
somewhere in the rich land of Lykia, or in Troia, for thou canst listen
everywhere to the man that is in need, as even now need cometh upon me.
For I have this stark wound, and mine arm is thoroughly pierced with
sharp pains, nor can my blood be stanched, and by the wound is my
shoulder burdened, and I cannot hold my spear firm, nor go and fight
against the enemy. And the best of men has perished, Sarpedon, the son
of Zeus, and he succours not even his own child. But do thou, O Prince,
heal me this stark wound, and lull my pains, and give me strength, that
I may call on my Lykian kinsmen, and spur them to the war, and myself
may fight about the dead man fallen.”

So spake he in his prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Straightway he
made his pains to cease, and in the grievous wound stanched the black
blood, and put courage into his heart. And Glaukos knew it within him,
and was glad, for that the great god speedily heard his prayer. First
went he all about and urged on them that were leaders of the Lykians to
fight around Sarpedon, and thereafter he went with long strides among
the Trojans, to Polydamas son of Panthoos and noble Agenor, and he went
after Aineias, and Hector of the helm of bronze, and standing by them
spake winged words: “Hector, now surely art thou utterly forgetful of
the allies, that for thy sake, far from their friends and their own
country, breathe their lives away! but thou carest not to aid them!
Sarpedon lies low, the leader of the Lykian shieldmen, he that defended
Lykia by his dooms and his might, yea him hath mailed Ares subdued
beneath the spear of Patroklos. But, friends, stand by him, and be
angry in your hearts lest the Myrmidons strip him of his harness, and
dishonour the dead, in wrath for the sake of the Danaans, even them
that perished, whom we slew with spears by the swift ships.”

So spake he, and sorrow seized the Trojans utterly, ungovernable and
not to be borne; for Sarpedon was ever the stay of their city, all a
stranger as he was, for many people followed with him, and himself the
best warrior of them all. Then they made straight for the Danaans
eagerly, and Hector led them, being wroth for Sarpedol’s sake. But the
fierce heart of Patrokloa son of Menoitios urged on the Achaians. And
he spake first to the twain Aiantes that themselves were right eager:
“Aiantes, now let defence be your desire, and be such as afore ye were
among men, or even braver yet. That man lies low who first leaped on to
the wall of the Achaians, even Sarpedon. Nay, let us strive to take
him, and work his body shame, and strip the harness from his shoulders,
and many a one of his comrades fighting for his sake let us subdue with
the pitiless bronze.”

So spake he, and they themselves were eager in defence. So on both
sides they strengthened the companies, Trojans and Lykians, Myrmidons
and Achaians, and they joined battle to fight around the dead man
fallen; terribly they shouted, and loud rang the harness of men. And as
the din ariseth of woodcutters in the glades of a mountain, and the
sound thereof is heard far away, so rose the din of them from the
wide-wayed earth, the noise of bronze and of well-tanned bulls’ hides
smitten with swords and double-pointed spears. And now not even a
clear-sighted man could any longer have known noble Sarpedon, for with
darts and blood and dust was he covered wholly from head to foot. And
ever men thronged about the dead, as in a steading flies buzz around
the full milk-pails, in the season of spring, when the milk drenches
the bowls, even so thronged they about the dead. Nor ever did Zeus turn
from the strong fight his shining eyes, but ever looked down on them,
and much in his heart he debated of the slaying of Patroklos, whether
there and then above divine Sarpedon glorious Hector should slay him
likewise in strong battle with the sword, and strip his harness from
his shoulders, or whether to more men yet he should deal sheer labour
of war. And thus to him as he pondered it seemed the better way, that
the gallant squire of Achilles, Peleus’ son, should straightway drive
the Trojans and Hector of the helm of bronze towards the city, and
should rob many of their life. And in Hector first he put a weakling
heart, and leaping into his car Hector turned in flight, and cried on
the rest of the Trojans to flee, for he knew the turning of the sacred
scales of Zeus. Thereon neither did the strong Lykians abide, but fled
all in fear, when they beheld their king stricken to the heart, lying
in the company of the dead, for many had fallen above him, when Kronion
made fierce the fight. Then the others stripped from the shoulders of
Sarpedon his shining arms of bronze, and these the strong son of
Menoitios gave to his comrades to bear to the hollow ships. Then Zeus
that gathereth the clouds spake to Apollo: “Prithee, dear Phoebus, go
take Sarpedon out of range of darts, and cleanse the black blood from
him, and thereafter bear him far away, and bathe him in the streams of
the river, and anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe him in garments
that wax not old, and send him to be wafted by fleet convoy, by the
twin brethren Sleep and Death, that quickly will set him in the rich
land of wide Lykia. There will his kinsmen and clansmen give him
burial, with barrow and pillar, for such is the due of the dead.”

So spake he, nor was Apollo disobedient to his father. He went down the
hills of Ida to the dread battle din, and straight way bore goodly
Sarpedon out of the darts, and carried him far away and bathed him in
the streams of the river, and anointed him with ambrosia, and clad him
in garments that wax not old, and sent him to be wafted by fleet
convoy, the twin brethren Sleep and Death, that swiftly set him down in
the rich land of wide Lykia. But Patroklos cried to his horses and
Automedon, and after the Trojans and Lykians went he, and so was
blindly forgetful, in his witlessness, for if he had kept the saying of
the son of Peleus, verily he should have escaped the evil fate of black
death. But ever is the wit of Zeus stronger than the wit of men, so now
he roused the spirit of Patroklos in his breast. There whom first, whom
last didst thou slay, Patroklos, when the gods called thee deathward?
Adrestos first, and Autonoos, and Echeklos, and Perimos, son of Megas,
and Epistor, and Melanippos, and thereafter Elasos, and Moulios, and
Pylartes; these he slew, but the others were each man of them fain of
flight. Then would the sons of the Achaians have taken high-gated Troy,
by the hands of Patroklos, for around and before him he raged with the
spear, but that Phoebus Apollo stood on the well-builded wall, with
baneful thoughts towards Patroklos, and succouring the Trojans. Thrice
clomb Patroklos on the corner of the lofty wall, and thrice did Apollo
force him back and smote the shining shield with his immortal hands.
But when for the fourth time he came on like a god, then cried
far-darting Apollo terribly, and spake winged words: “Give back,
Patroklos of the seed of Zeus! Not beneath thy spear is it fated that
the city of the valiant Trojans shall fall, nay nor beneath Achilles, a
man far better than thou.”

So spake he, and Patroklos retreated far back, avoiding the wrath of
far-darting Apollo. But Hector within the Skaian gates was restraining
his whole-hooved horses, pondering whether he should drive again into
the din and fight, or should call unto the host to gather to the wall.
While thus he was thinking, Phoebus Apollo stood by him in the guise of
a young man and a strong, Asios, who was the mother’s brother of
horse-taming Hector, being own brother of Hekabe, and son of Dymas, who
dwelt in Phrygia, on the streams of Sangarios. In his guise spake
Apollo, son of Zeus, to Hector: “Hector, wherefore dost thou cease from
fight? It doth not behove thee. Would that I were as much stronger than
thou as I am weaker, thereon quickly shouldst thou stand aloof from war
to thy hurt. But come, turn against Patroklos thy strong-hooved horses,
if perchance thou mayst slay him, and Apollo give thee glory.”

So spake the god, and went back again into the moil of men. But
renowned Hector bade wise-hearted Kebriones to lash his horses into the
war. Then Apollo went and passed into the press, and sent a dread panic
among the Argives, but to the Trojans and Hector gave he renown. And
Hector let the other Argives be, and slew none of them, but against
Patroklos he turned his strong-hooved horses, and Patroklos on the
other side leaped from his chariot to the ground, with a spear in his
left hand, and in his other hand grasped a shining jagged stone, that
his hand covered. Firmly he planted himself and hurled it, nor long did
he shrink from his foe, nor was his cast in vain, but he struck
Kebriones the charioteer of Hector, the bastard son of renowned Priam,
on the brow with the sharp stone, as he held the reins of the horses.
Both his brows the stone drave together, and his bone held not, but his
eyes fell to the ground in the dust, there, in front of his feet. Then
he, like a diver, fell from the well-wrought car, and his spirit left
his bones. Then taunting him didst thou address him, knightly
Patroklos: “Out on it, how nimble a man, how lightly he diveth! Yea, if
perchance he were on the teeming deep, this man would satisfy many by
seeking for oysters, leaping from the ship, even if it were stormy
weather, so lightly now he diveth from the chariot into the plain.
Verily among the Trojans too there be diving men.”

So speaking he set on the hero Kebriones with the rush of a lion, that
while wasting the cattle-pens is smitten in the breast, and his own
valour is his bane, even so against Kebriones, Patroklos, didst thou
leap furiously. But Hector, on the other side, leaped from his chariot
to the ground. And these twain strove for Kebriones like lions, that on
the mountain peaks fight, both hungering, both high of heart, for a
slain hind. Even so for Kebriones’ sake these two masters of the
war-cry, Patroklos son of Menoitios, and renowned Hector, were eager
each to hew the other’s flesh with the ruthless bronze.

Hector then seized him by the head, and slackened not hold, while
Patroklos on the other side grasped him by the foot, and thereon the
others, Trojans and Danaans, joined strong battle. And as the East wind
and the South contend with one another in shaking a deep wood in the
dells of a mountain, shaking beech, and ash, and smooth-barked cornel
tree, that clash against each other their long boughs with marvellous
din, and a noise of branches broken, so the Trojans and Achaians were
leaping on each other and slaying, nor had either side any thought of
ruinous flight. And many sharp darts were fixed around Kebriones, and
winged arrows leaping from the bow-string, and many mighty stones smote
the shields of them that fought around him. But he in the whirl of dust
lay mighty and mightily fallen, forgetful of his chivalry.

Now while the sun was going about mid-heaven, so long the darts smote
either side, and the host fell, but when the sun turned to the time of
the loosing of oxen, lo, then beyond their doom the Achaians proved the
better. The hero Kebriones drew they forth from the darts, out of the
tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the harness from his shoulders, and
with ill design against the Trojans, Patroklos rushed upon them. Three
times then rushed he on, peer of swift Ares, shouting terribly, and
thrice he slew nine men. But when the fourth time he sped on like a
god, thereon to thee, Patroklos, did the end of life appear, for
Phoebus met thee in the strong battle, in dreadful wise. And Patroklos
was not ware of him coming through the press, for hidden in thick mist
did he meet him, and stood behind him, and smote his back and broad
shoulders with a down-stroke of his hand, and his eyes were dazed. And
from his head Phoebus Apollo smote the helmet that rolled rattling away
with a din beneath the hooves of the horses, the helm with upright
socket, and the crests were defiled with blood and dust. And all the
long-shadowed spear was shattered in the hands of Patroklos, the spear
great and heavy and strong, and sharp, while from his shoulders the
tasselled shield with the baldric fell to the ground.

And the prince Apollo, son of Zeus, loosed his corslet, and blindness
seized his heart and his shining limbs were unstrung, and he stood in
amaze, and at close quarters from behind a Dardanian smote him on the
back, between the shoulders, with a sharp spear, even Euphorbos, son of
Panthoos, who excelled them of his age in casting the spear, and in
horsemanship, and in speed of foot. Even thus, verily, had he cast down
twenty men from their chariots, though then first had he come with his
car to learn the lesson of war. He it was that first smote a dart into
thee, knightly Patroklos, nor overcame thee, but ran back again and
mingled with the throng, first drawing forth from the flesh his ashen
spear, nor did he abide the onset of Patroklos, unarmed as he was, in
the strife. But Patroklos, being overcome by the stroke of the god, and
by the spear, gave ground, and retreated to the host of his comrades,
avoiding Fate. But Hector, when he beheld great-hearted Patroklos give
ground, being smitten with the keen bronze, came nigh unto him through
the ranks, and wounded him with a spear, in the lowermost part of the
belly, and drave the bronze clean through. And he fell with a crash,
and sorely grieved the host of Achaians. And as when a lion hath
overcome in battle an untiring boar, they twain fighting with high
heart on the crests of a hill, about a little well, and both are
desirous to drink, and the lion hath by force overcome the boar that
draweth difficult breath; so after that he had slain many did Hector
son of Priam take the life away from the strong son of Menoitios,
smiting him at close quarters with the spear; and boasting over him he
spake winged words: “Patroklos, surely thou saidst that thou wouldst
sack my town, and from Trojan women take away the day of freedom, and
bring them in ships to thine own dear country: fool! nay, in front of
these were the swift horses of Hector straining their speed for the
fight; and myself in wielding the spear excel among the war-loving
Trojans, even I who ward from them the day of destiny: but thee shall
vultures here devour. Ah, wretch, surely Achilles for all his valour,
availed thee not, who straitly charged thee as thou camest, he abiding
there, saying, ‘Come not to me, Patroklos lord of steeds, to the hollow
ships, till thou hast torn the gory doublet of man-slaying Hector about
his breast;’ so, surely, he spake to thee, and persuaded the wits of
thee in thy witlessness.”

Then faintly didst thou answer him, knightly Patroklos: “Boast greatly,
as now, Hector, for to thee have Zeus, son of Kronos, and Apollo given
the victory, who lightly have subdued me; for themselves stripped my
harness from my shoulders. But if twenty such as thou had encountered
me, here had they all perished, subdued beneath my spear. But me have
ruinous Fate and the son of Leto slain, and of men Euphorbos, but thou
art the third in my slaying. But another thing will I tell thee, and do
thou lay it up in thy heart: verily thou thyself art not long to live,
but already doth Death stand hard by thee, and strong Fate, that thou
art to be subdued by the hands of noble Achilles, of the seed of
Aiakos.”

Even as so he spake the end of death overshadowed him. And his soul,
fleeting from his limbs, went down to the house of Hades, wailing its
own doom, leaving manhood and youth.

Then renowned Hector spake to him even in his death: “Patroklos,
wherefore to me dolt thou prophesy sheer destruction? who knows but
that Achilles, the child of fair-tressed Thetis, will first be smitten
by my spear, and lose his life?”

So spake he, and drew the spear of bronze from the wound, setting his
foot on the dead, and cast him off on his back from the spear. And
straightway with the spear he went after Automedon, the godlike squire
of the swift-footed Aiakides, for he was eager to smite him; but his
swift-footed immortal horses bare him out of the battle, horses that
the gods gave to Peleus, a splendid gift.



BOOK XVII.

Of the battle around the body of Patroklos.


But Atreus’ son, Menelaos dear to Ares, was not unaware of the slaying
of Patroklos by the Trojans in the fray. He went up through the front
of the fight harnessed in flashing bronze, and strode over the body as
above a first-born calf standeth lowing its mother. Thus above
Patroklos strode fair-haired Menelaos, and before him held his spear
and the circle of his shield, eager to slay whoever should encounter
him. Then was Panthoos’ son of the stout ashen spear not heedless of
noble Patroklos as he lay, and he smote on the circle of the shield of
Menelaos, but the bronze spear brake it not, but the point was bent
back in the stubborn shield. And Menelaos Atreus’ son in his turn made
at him with his bronze spear, having prayed unto father Zeus, and as he
gave back pierced the nether part of his throat, and threw his weight
into the stroke, following his heavy hand; and sheer through the tender
neck went the point of the spear. And he fell with a crash, and his
armour rang upon him. In blood was his hair drenched that was like unto
the hair of the Graces, and his tresses closely knit with bands of
silver and gold.

Then easily would the son of Atreus have borne off the noble spoils of
Panthoos’ son, had not Phoebus Apollo grudged it to him, and aroused
against him Hector peer of swift Ares, putting on the semblance of a
man, of Mentes chief of the Kikones. And he spake aloud to him winged
words: “Hector, now art thou hasting after things unattainable, even
the horses of wise Aiakides; for hard are they to be tamed or driven by
mortal man, save only Achilles whom an immortal mother bare. Meanwhile
hath warlike Menelaos Atreus’ son stridden over Patroklos and slain the
best of the Trojans there, even Panthoos’ son Euphorbos, and hath
stayed him in his impetuous might.”

Thus saying the god went back into the strife of men, but dire grief
darkened Hectors inmost soul, and then he gazed searchingly along the
lines, and straightway was aware of the one man stripping off the noble
arms, and the other lying on the earth; and blood was flowing about the
gaping wound. Then he went through the front of the fight harnessed in
flashing bronze, crying a shrill cry, like unto Hephaistos’ flame
unquenchable. Not deaf to his shrill cry was Atreus’ son, and sore
troubled he spake to his great heart: “Ay me, if I shall leave behind
me these goodly arms, and Patroklos who here lieth for my vengeance’
sake, I fear lest some Danaan beholding it be wroth against me. But if
for honour’s sake I do battle alone with Hector and the Trojans, I fear
lest they come about me many against one; for all the Trojans is
bright-helmed Hector leading hither. But if I might somewhere find Aias
of the loud war-cry, then both together would we go and be mindful of
battle even were it against the power of heaven, if haply we might save
his dead for Achilles Peleus’ son: that were best among these ills.”

While thus he communed with his mind and heart, therewithal the Trojan
ranks came onward, and Hector at their head. Then Menelaos gave
backward, and left the dead man, turning himself ever about like a
deep-waned lion which men and dogs chase from a fold with spears and
cries; and his strong heart within him groweth chill, and loth goeth he
from the steading; so from Patroklos went fair-haired Menelaos, and
turned and stood, when he came to the host of his comrades, searching
for mighty Aias Telamol’s son. Him very speedily he espied on the left
of the whole battle, cheering his comrades and rousing them to fight,
for great terror had Phoebus Apollo sent on them; and he hasted him to
run, and straightway stood by him and said: “This way, beloved Aias;
let us bestir us for the dead Patroklos, if haply his naked corpse at
least we may carry to Achilles, though his armour is held by Hector of
the glancing helm.”

Thus spake he, and aroused the heart of wise Aias. And he went up
through the front of the fight, and with him fair-haired Menelaos. Now
Hector, when he had stripped from Patroklos his noble armour, was
dragging him thence that he might cut off the head from the shoulders
with the keen bronze and carry his body to give to the dogs of Troy.
But Aias came anigh, and the shield that he bare was as a tower; then
Hector gave back into the company of his comrades, and sprang into his
chariot; and the goodly armour he gave to the Trojans to carry to the
city, to be great glory unto him. But Aias spread his broad shield over
the son of Menoitios and stood as it were a lion before his whelps when
huntsmen in a forest encounter him as he leadeth his young. And by his
side stood Atreus’ son, Menelaos dear to Ares, nursing great sorrow in
his breast.

Then Hector called on the Trojans with a mighty shout; “Trojans and
Lykians and Dardanians that fight hand to hand, be men, my friends, and
bethink you of impetuous valour, until I do on me the goodly arms of
noble Achilles that I stripped from brave Patroklos when I slew him.”

Thus having spoken went Hector of the glancing helm forth out of the
strife of war, and ran and speedily with fleet feet following overtook
his comrades, not yet far off, who were bearing to the city Peleides’
glorious arms. And standing apart from the dolorous battle he changed
his armour; his own he gave the warlike Trojans to carry to sacred
Ilios, and he put on the divine arms of Achilles, Peleus’ son.

But when Zeus that gathereth the clouds beheld from afar off Hector
arming him in the armour of Peleus’ godlike son, he shook his head and
spake thus unto his soul: “Ah, hapless man, no thought is in thy heart
of death that yet draweth nigh unto thee; thou doest on thee the divine
armour of a peerless man before whom the rest have terror. His comrade,
gentle and brave, thou hast slain, and unmeetly hast stripped the
armour from his head and shoulders; yet now for a while at least I will
give into thy hands great might, in recompense for this, even that
nowise shalt thou come home out of the battle, for Andromache to
receive from thee Peleides’ glorious arms.”

Thus spake the son of Kronos, and bowed his dark brows therewithal.

But the armour fitted itself unto Hectors body, and Ares the dread
war-god entered into him, and his limbs were filled within with valour
and strength. Then he sped among the noble allies with a mighty cry,
and in the flashing of his armour he seemed to all of them like unto
Peleus’ great-hearted son. And he came to each and encouraged him with
his words—Mesthles and Glaukos and Medon and Thersilochos and
Asteropaios and Deisenor and Hippothoos and Phorkys and Chromios and
the augur Ennomos—these encouraged he and spake to them winged words:
“Listen, ye countless tribes of allies that dwell round about. It was
not for mere numbers that I sought or longed when I gathered each of
you from your cities, but that ye might zealously guard the Trojans’
wives and infant little ones from the war-loving Achaians. For this end
am I wearying my people by taking gifts and food from them, and nursing
thereby the courage of each of you. Now therefore let all turn straight
against the foe and live or die, for such is the dalliance of war. And
whoso shall drag Patroklos, dead though he be, among the horse-taming
men of Troy, and make Aias yield, to him will I award half the spoils
and keep half myself; so shall his glory be great as mine.”

Thus spake he, and they against the Danaans charged with all their
weight, levelling their spears, and their hearts were high of hope to
drag the corpse from under Aias, Telamol’s son. Fond men! from full
many reft he life over that corpse. And then spake Aias to Menelaos of
the loud war-cry: “Dear Menelaos, fosterling of Zeus, no longer count I
that we two of ourselves shall return home out of the war. Nor have I
so much dread for the corpse of Patroklos, that shall soon glut the
dogs and birds of the men of Troy, as for thy head and mine lest some
evil fall thereon, for all is shrouded by a storm-cloud of war, even by
Hector, and sheer doom stareth in our face. But come, call thou to the
best men of the Danaans, if haply any hear.”

Thus spake he, and Menelaos of the loud war-cry disregarded him not,
but shouted unto the Danaans, crying a far-heard cry: “O friends, ye
leaders and counsellors of the Argives, who by the side of the sons of
Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaos, drink at the common cost and are all
commanders of the host, on whom wait glory and honour from Zeus, hard
is it for me to distinguish each chief amid the press—such blaze is
there of the strife of war. But let each go forward of himself and be
wroth at heart that Patroklos should become a sport among the dogs of
Troy.”

Thus spake he, and Oileus’ son fleet Aias heard him clearly, and was
first to run along the mellay to meet him, and after him Idomeneus, and
Idomeneus’ brother-in-arms, Meriones, peer of the man-slaying war-god.
And who shall of his own thought tell the names of the rest, even of
all that after these aroused the battle of the Achaians?

Now the Trojans charged forward in close array, and Hector led them.
And as when at the mouth of some heaven-born river a mighty wave
roareth against the stream, and arouseth the high cliffs’ echo as the
salt sea belloweth on the beach, so loud was the cry wherewith the
Trojans came. But the Achaians stood firm around Menoitios’ son with
one soul all, walled in with shields of bronze. And over their bright
helmets the son of Kronos shed thick darkness, for in the former time
was Menoitios’ son not unloved of him, while he was yet alive and
squire of Aiakides. So was Zeus loth that he should become a prey of
the dogs of his enemies at Troy, and stirred his comrades to do battle
for him.

Now first the Trojans thrust back the glancing-eyed Achaians, who
shrank before them and left the dead, yet the proud Trojans slew not
any of them with spears, though they were fain, but set to hale the
corpse. But little while would the Achaians hold back therefrom, for
very swiftly Aias rallied them, Aias the first in presence and in deeds
of all the Danaans after the noble son of Peleus. Right through the
fighters in the forefront rushed he like a wild boar in his might that
in the mountains when he turneth at bay scattereth lightly dogs and
lusty young men through the glades. Thus did proud Telamol’s son the
glorious Aias press on the Trojan battalions and lightly scatter them,
as they had bestrode Patroklos and were full fain to drag him to their
city and win renown.

Then would the Trojans in their turn in their weakness overcome have
been driven back into Ilios by the Achaians dear to Ares, and the
Argives would have won glory even against the appointment of Zeus by
their power and might. But Apollo himself aroused Aineias, putting on
the semblance of Periphas the herald, the son of Epytos, who grew old
with his old father in his heraldship, of friendly thought toward
Aineias. In his similitude spake Apollo, son of Zeus: “Aineias, how
could ye ever guard high Ilios if it were against the will of God?
Other men have I seen that trust in their own might and power and
valour, and in their host, even though they have scant folk to lead.
But here, albeit Zeus is fainer far to give victory to us than to the
Danaans, yet ye are dismayed exceedingly and fight not.”

Thus spake he, and Aineias knew far-darting Apollo when he looked upon
his face, and spake unto Hector, shouting loud “Hector and ye other
leaders of the Trojans and their allies, shame were this if in our
weakness overcome we were driven back into Ilios by the Achaians dear
to Ares. Nay, thus saith a god, who standeth by my side: Zeus, highest
Orderer, is our helper in this fight. Therefore let us go right onward
against the Danaans. Not easily at least let them take the dead
Patroklos to the ships.”

Thus spake he, and leapt forth far before the fighters in the front.
And the Trojans rallied and stood up against the Achaians. Thus strove
they as it had been fire, nor wouldst thou have thought there was still
sun or moon, for over all the battle where the chiefs stood around the
slain son of Menoitios they were shrouded in darkness, while the other
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians fought at ease in the clear air, and
piercing sunlight was spread over them, and on all the earth and hills
there was no cloud seen; and they ceased fighting now sad again,
avoiding each other’s dolorous darts and standing far apart. But they
who were in the midst endured affliction of the darkness and the
battle, and all the best men of them were wearied by the pitiless
weight of their bronze arms.

Thus all day long waxed the mighty fray of their sore strife; and
unabatingly ever with the sweat of toil were the knees and legs and
feet of each man and arms anal eyes bedewed as the two hosts did battle
around the brave squire of fleet Aiakides. And as when a man giveth the
hide of a great bull to his folk to stretch, all soaked in fat, and
they take and stretch it standing in a circle, and straightway the
moisture thereof departeth and the fat entereth in under the haling of
many hands, and it is all stretched throughout,—thus they on both sides
haled the dead man this way and that in narrow space, for their hearts
were high of hope, the Trojans that they should drag him to Ilios and
the Achaians to the hollow ships; and around him the fray waxed wild,
nor might Ares rouser of hosts nor Athene despise the sight thereof,
albeit their anger were exceeding great.

Such was the grievous travail of men and horses over Patroklos that
Zeus on that day wrought. But not as yet knew noble Achilles aught of
Patroklos’ death, for far away from the swift ships they were fighting
beneath the wall of the men of Troy. Therefore never deemed he in his
heart that he was dead, but that he should come back alive, after that
he had touched the gates; for neither that other thought had he
anywise, that Patroklos should sack the stronghold without his aid.

Now the rest continually around the dead man with their keen spears
made onset relentlessly and slew each the other. And thus would one
speak among the mail-clad Achaians: “Friends, it were verily not
glorious for us to go back to the hollow ships; rather let the black
earth yawn for us all beneath our feet. Far better were that
straightway for us if we suffer the horse-taming Trojans to hale this
man to their city and win renown.”

And thus on the other side would one of the great-hearted Trojans say:
“Friends, though it were our fate that all together we be slain beside
this man, let none yet give backward from the fray.”

Thus would one speak, and rouse the spirit of each. So they fought on,
and the iron din went up through the high desert air unto the brazen
heaven. But the horses of Aiakides that were apart from the battle were
weeping, since first they were aware that their charioteer was fallen
in the dust beneath the hand of man-slaying Hector. Verily Automedon,
Diores’ valiant son, plied them oft with blows of the swift lash, and
oft with gentle words he spake to them and oft with chiding, yet would
they neither go back to the ships at the broad Hellespont nor yet to
the battle after the Achaians, but as a pillar abideth firm that
standeth on the tomb of a man or woman dead, so abode they immovably
with the beautiful chariot, abasing their heads unto the earth. And hot
tears flowed from their eyes to the ground as they mourned in sorrow
for their charioteer, and their rich manes were soiled as they drooped
from beneath the yoke-cushion on both sides beside the yoke. And when
the son of Kronos beheld them mourning he had compassion on them, and
shook his head and spake to his own heart: “Ah, hapless pair, why gave
we you to king Peleus, a mortal man, while ye are deathless and ever
young? Was it that ye should suffer sorrows among ill-fated men? For
methinketh there is nothing more piteous than a man among all things
that breathe and creep upon the earth. But verily Hector Priam’s son
shall not drive you and your deftly-wrought car; that will I not
suffer. Is it a small thing that he holdeth the armour and vaunteth
himself vainly thereupon? Nay, I will put courage into your knees and
heart that ye may bring Automedon also safe out of the war to the
hollow ships. For yet further will I increase victory to the men of
Troy, so that they slay until they come unto the well-timbered ships,
and the sun set and divine night come down.”

Thus saying he breathed good courage into the horses. And they shook to
earth the dust from their manes, and lightly bare the swift car amid
Trojans and Achaians. And behind them fought Automedon, albeit in grief
for his comrade, swooping with his chariot as a vulture on wild geese;
for lightly he would flee out of the onset of the Trojans and lightly
charge, pursuing them through the thick mellay. Yet could he not slay
any man as he halted to pursue them, for it was impossible that being
alone in his sacred car he should at once assail them with the spear
and hold his fleet horses. Then at last espied him a comrade, even
Alkimedon son of Laerkes, son of Haimon, and he halted behind the car
and spake unto Automedon: “Automedon, what god hath put into thy breast
unprofitable counsel and taken from thee wisdom, that thus alone thou
art fighting against the Trojans in the forefront of the press? Thy
comrade even now was slain, and Hector goeth proudly, wearing on his
own shoulders the armour of Aiakides.”

And Automedon son of Diores answered him, saying: “Alkimedon, what
other Achaian hath like skill to guide the spirit of immortal steeds,
save only Patroklos, peer of gods in counsel, while he yet lived? but
now have death and fate overtaken him. But take thou the lash and
shining reins, and I will get me down from my horses, that I may
fight.”

Thus spake he, and Alkimedon leapt on the fleet war-chariot and swiftly
took the lash and reins in his hands, and Automedon leapt down. And
noble Hector espied them, and straightway spake unto Aineias as he
stood near: “Aineias, counsellor of mail-clad Trojans, I espy here the
two horses of fleet Aiakides come forth to battle with feeble
charioteers. Therefore might I hope to take them if thou in thy heart
art willing, since they would not abide our onset and stand to do
battle against us.”

Thus spake he, and the brave son of Anchises disregarded him not. And
they twain went right onward, their shoulders shielded by ox-hides
dried and tough, and bronze thick overlaid. And with them went both
Chromios and godlike Aretos, and their hearts were of high hope to slay
the men and drive off the strong-necked horses—fond hope, for not
without blood lost were they to get them back from Automedon. He
praying to father Zeus was filled in his inmost heart with valour and
strength. And straightway he spake to Alkimedon, his faithful comrade:
“Alkimedon, hold the horses not far from me, but with their very breath
upon my back; for I deem that Hector the son of Priam will not refrain
him from his fury until he mount behind Achilles’ horses of goodly
manes after slaying us twain, and dismay the ranks of Argive men, or
else himself fall among the foremost.”

Thus said he, and called upon the Aiantes and Menelaos: “Aiantes,
leaders of the Argives, and Menelaos, lo now, commit ye the corpse unto
whoso may best avail to bestride it and resist the ranks of men, and
come ye to ward the day of doom from us who are yet alive, for here in
the dolorous war are Hector and Aineias, the best men of the Trojans,
pressing hard. Yet verily these issues lie in the lap of the gods: I
too will cast my spear, and the rest shall Zeus decide.”

He said, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled it, and smote on
the circle of the shield of Aretos, and the shield sustained not the
spear, but right through went the bronze, and he forced it into his
belly low down through his belt. And as when a strong man with a sharp
axe smiting behind the horns of an ox of the homestead cleaveth the
sinew asunder, and the ox leapeth forward and falleth, so leapt Aretos
forward and fell on his back; and the spear in his entrails very
piercingly quivering unstrung his limbs. And Hector hurled at Automedon
with his bright spear, but he looked steadfastly on the bronze javelin
as it came at him and avoided it, for he stooped forward, and the long
spear fixed itself in the ground behind, and the javelin-butt quivered,
and there dread Ares took away its force. And then had they lashed at
each other with their swords hand to hand, had not the Aiantes parted
them in their fury, when they were come through the mellay at their
comrades’ call. Before them Hector and Aineias and godlike Chromios
shrank backward and gave ground and left Aretos wounded to the death as
he lay. And Automedon, peer of swift Ares, stripped off the armour of
the dead, and spake exultingly: “Verily, I have a little eased my heart
of grief for the death of Menoitios’ son, albeit a worse man than him
have I slain.”

Thus saying he took up the gory spoils and set them in his car, and gat
him thereon, with feet and hands all bloody, as a lion that hath
devoured a bull.

Now great-hearted Aias and Menelaos were aware of Zeus how he gave the
Trojans their turn to victory. First of these to speak was great Aias
son of Telamon: “Ay me, now may any man, even though he be a very fool,
know that father Zeus himself is helping the Trojans. Come, let us
ourselves devise some excellent means, that we may both hale the corpse
away and ourselves return home to the joy of our friends, who grieve as
they look hitherward and deem that no longer shall the fury of
man-slaying Hector’s unapproachable hand refrain itself, but fall upon
the black ships. And would there were some comrade to carry tidings
with all speed unto the son of Peleus, since I deem that he hath not
even heard the grievous tidings, how his dear comrade is slain. But
nowhere can I behold such an one among the Achaians, for themselves and
their horses likewise are wrapped in darkness. O father Zeus, deliver
thou the sons of the Achaians from the darkness, and make clear sky and
vouchsafe sight unto our eyes. In the light be it that thou slayest us,
since it is thy good pleasure that we die.”

Then fair-haired Menelaos departed glancing everywhither, as an eagle
which men say hath keenest sight of all birds under heaven, and though
he be far aloft the fleet-footed hare eludeth him not by crouching
beneath a leafy bush, but the eagle swoopeth thereon and swiftly
seizeth her and taketh her life. Thus in that hour, Menelaos fosterling
of Zeus, ranged thy shining eyes everywhither through the multitude of
the host of thy comrades, if haply they might behold Nestor’s son yet
alive. Him quickly he perceived at the left of the whole battle,
heartening his comrades and rousing them to fight. And fair-haired
Menelaos came and stood nigh and said unto him: “Antilochos, fosterling
of Zeus, come hither that thou mayest learn woful tidings—would it had
never been. Ere now, I ween, thou too hast known by thy beholding that
God rolleth mischief upon the Danaans, and with the Trojans is victory.
And slain is the best man of the Achaians, Patroklos, and great sorrow
is wrought for the Danaans. But run thou to the ships of the Achaians
and quickly tell this to Achilles, if haply he may straightway rescue
to his ship the naked corpse: but his armour is held by Hector of the
glancing helmet.”

Thus spake he, and Antilochos had horror of the word he heard. And long
time speechlessness possessed him, and his eyes were filled with tears,
and his full voice choked. Yet for all this disregarded he not the
bidding of Menelaos, but set him to run, when he had given his armour
to a noble comrade, Laodokos, who close anigh him was wheeling his
whole-hooved horses.

So him his feet bare out of the battle weeping, to Achilles son of
Peleus carrying an evil tale. But thy heart, Menelaos fosterling of
Zeus, chose not to stay to aid the wearied comrades from whom
Antilochos departed, and great sorrow was among the Pylians. But to
them Menelaos sent noble Thrasymedes, and himself went again to
bestride the hero Patroklos. And he hasted and stood beside the Aiantes
and straightway spake to them: “So have I sent that man to the swift
ships to go to fleet-footed Achilles. Yet deem I not that he will now
come, for all his wrath against noble Hector, for he could not fight
unarmed against the men of Troy. But let us ourselves devise some
excellent means, both how we may hale the dead away, and how we
ourselves may escape death and fate amid the Trojans’ battle-cry.”

Then answered him great Aias Telamol’s son, saying: “All this hast thou
said well, most noble Menelaos. But do thou and Meriones put your
shoulders beneath the dead and lift him and bear him swiftly out of the
fray, while we twain behind you shall do battle with the Trojans and
noble Hector, one in heart as we are in name, for from of old time we
are wont to await fierce battle side by side.”

Thus spake he, and the others took the dead man in their arms and
lifted him mightily on high. But the Trojan host behind cried aloud
when they saw the Achaians lifting the corpse, and charged like hounds
that spring in front of hunter-youths upon a wounded wild boar, and for
a while run in haste to rend him, but when he wheeleth round among
them, trusting in his might, then they give ground and shrink back here
and there. Thus for a while the Trojans pressed on with all their
power, striking with swords and double-headed spears, but when the
Aiantes turned about and halted over against them, then they changed
colour, and none dared farther onset to do battle around the dead.



BOOK XVIII.

How Achilles grieved for Patroklos, and how Thetis asked for him new
armour of Hephaistos; and of the making of the armour.


Thus fought the rest in the likeness of blazing fire, while to Achilles
came Antilochos, a messenger fleet of foot. Him found he in front of
his ships of upright horns, boding in his soul the things which even
now were accomplished. And sore troubled he spake to his great heart:
“Ay me, wherefore again are the flowing-haired Achaians flocking to the
ships and flying in rout over the plain? May the gods not have wrought
against me the grievous fears at my heart, even as my mother revealed
and told me that while I am yet alive the best man of the Myrmidons
must by deed of the men of Troy forsake the light of the sun. Surely
now must Menoitios’ valiant son be dead—foolhardy! surely I bade him
when he should have beaten off the fire of the foe to come back to the
ships nor with Hector fight amain.”

While thus he held debate in his heart and soul, there drew nigh unto
him noble Nestor’s son, shedding hot tears, and spake his grievous
tidings: “Ay me, wise Peleus’ son, very bitter tidings must thou hear,
such as I would had never been. Fallen is Patroklos, and they are
fighting around his body, naked, for his armour is held by Hector of
the glancing helm.”

Thus spake he, and a black cloud of grief enwrapped Achilles, and with
both hands he took dark dust and poured it over his head and defiled
his comely face, and on his fragrant doublet black ashes fell. And
himself in the dust lay mighty and mightily fallen, and with his own
hands tore and marred his hair. And the handmaidens, whom Achilles and
Patroklos took captive, cried aloud in the grief of their hearts, and
ran forth around valiant Achilles, and all beat on their breasts with
their hands, and the knees of each of them were unstrung. And
Antilochos on the other side wailed and shed tears, holding Achilles’
hands while he groaned in his noble heart, for he feared lest he should
cleave his throat with the sword. Then terribly moaned Achilles; and
his lady mother heard him as she sate in the depths of the sea beside
her ancient sire. And thereon she uttered a cry, and the goddesses
flocked around her, all the daughters of Nereus that were in the deep
of the sea. With these the bright cave was filled, and they all beat
together on their breasts, and Thetis led the lament: “Listen, sister
Nereids, that ye all hear and know well what sorrows are in my heart.
Ay me unhappy, ay me that bare to my sorrow the first of men! For after
I had borne a son noble and strong, the chief of heroes, and he shot up
like a young branch, then when I had reared him as a plant in a very
fruitful field I sent him in beaked ships to Ilios to fight against the
men of Troy; but never again shall I welcome him back to his home, to
the house of Peleus. And while he yet liveth in my sight and beholdeth
the light of the sun, he sorroweth, neither can I help him any whit
though I go unto him. But I will go, that I may look upon my dear
child, and learn what sorrow hath come to him though he abide aloof
from the war.”

Thus spake she and left the cave; and the nymphs went with her weeping,
and around them the surge of the sea was sundered. And when they came
to deep-soiled Troy-land they went up upon the shore in order, where
the ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up thickly around fleet Achilles.
And as he groaned heavily his lady mother stood beside him, and with a
shrill cry clasped the bead of her child, and spake unto him winged
words of lamentation: “My child, why weepest thou? what sorrow hath
come to thy heart? Tell it forth, hide it not. One thing at least hath
been accomplished of Zeus according to the prayer thou madest, holding
up to him thy hands, that the sons of the Achaians should all be pent
in at the ships, through lack of thee, and should suffer hateful
things.”

Then groaning heavily spake unto her Achilles fleet of foot: “My
mother, that prayer truly hath the Olympian accomplished for me. But
what delight have I therein, since my dear comrade is dead, Patroklos,
whom I honoured above all my comrades as it were my very self! Him have
I lost, and Hector that slew him hath stripped from him the armour
great and fair, a wonder to behold, that the gods gave to Peleus a
splendid gift, on the day when they laid thee in the bed of a mortal
man. Would thou hadst abode among the deathless daughters of the sea,
and Peleus had wedded a mortal bride! But now, that thou mayest have
sorrow a thousand fold in thy heart for a dead son, never shalt thou
welcome him back home, since my soul biddeth me also live no longer nor
abide among men, if Hector be not first smitten by my spear and yield
his life, and pay for his slaughter of Patroklos, Menoitios’ son.”

Then answered unto him Thetis shedding tears: “Short-lived, I ween,
must thou be then, my child, by what thou sayest, for straightway after
Hector is death appointed unto thee.”

Then mightily moved spake unto her Achilles fleet of foot: “Straightway
may I die, since I might not succour my comrade at his slaying. He hath
fallen afar from his country and lacked my help in his sore need. Now
therefore, since I go not back to my dear native land, neither have at
all been succour to Patroklos nor to all my other comrades that have
been slain by noble Hector, but I sit beside my ships a profitless
burden of the earth, I that in war am such an one as is none else of
the mail-clad Achaians, though in council are others better—may strife
perish utterly among gods and men, and wrath that stirreth even a wise
man to be vexed, wrath that far sweeter than trickling honey waxeth
like smoke in the breasts of men, even as I was wroth even now against
Agamemnon king of men. But bygones will we let be, for all our pain,
curbing the heart in our breasts under necessity. Now go I forth, that
I may light on the destroyer of him I loved, on Hector: then will I
accept my death whensoever Zeus willeth to accomplish it and the other
immortal gods. For not even the mighty Herakles escaped death, albeit
most dear to Kronian Zeus the king, but Fate overcame him and Hera’s
cruel wrath. So also shall I, if my fate hath been fashioned likewise,
lie low when I am dead. But now let me win high renown, let me set some
Trojan woman, some deep-bosomed daughter of Dardanos, staunching with
both hands the tears upon her tender cheeks and wailing bitterly; yea,
let them know that I am come back, though I tarried long from the war.
Hold not me then from the battle in thy love, for thou shalt not
prevail with me.”

Then Thetis the silver-footed goddess answered him, saying: “Yea
verily, my child, no blame is in this, that thou ward sheer destruction
from thy comrades in their distress. But thy fair glittering armour of
bronze is held among the Trojans. Hector of the glancing helm beareth
it on his shoulders in triumph, yet not for long, I ween, shall he
glory therein, for death is hard anigh him. But thou, go not yet down
into the mellay of war until thou see me with thine eyes come hither.
In the morning will I return, at the coming up of the sun, bearing fair
armour from the king Hephaistos.”

Thus spake she and turned to go from her son, and as she turned she
spake among her sisters of the sea: “Ye now go down within the wide
bosom of the deep, to visit the Ancient One of the Sea and our father’s
house, and tell him all. I am going to high Olympus to Hephaistos of
noble skill, if haply he will give unto my son noble armour shining
gloriously.”

Thus spake she, and they forthwith went down beneath the surge of the
sea. And the silver-footed goddess Thetis went on to Olympus that she
might bring noble armour to her son.

So her unto Olympus her feet bore. But the Achaians with terrible cries
were fleeing before man-slaying Hector till they came to the ships and
to the Hellespont. Nor might the well-greaved Achaians drag the corpse
of Patroklos Achilles’ squire out of the darts, for now again overtook
him the host and the horses of Troy, and Hector son of Priam, in might
as it were a flame of fire. Thrice did glorious Hector seize him from
behind by the feet, resolved to drag him away, and mightily called upon
the men of Troy. Thrice did the two Aiantes, clothed on with impetuous
might, beat him off from the dead man, but he nathless, trusting in his
might, anon would charge into the press, anon would stand and cry
aloud, but he gave ground never a whit. As when shepherds in the field
avail nowise to chase a fiery lion in fierce hunger away from a
carcase, so availed not the two warrior Aiantes to scare Hector son of
Priam from the dead. And now would he have won the body and gained
renown unspeakable, had not fleet wind-footed Iris come speeding from
Olympus with a message to the son of Peleus to array him, unknown of
Zeus and the other gods, for Hera sent her. And she stood anigh and
spake to him winged words: “Rouse thee, son of Peleus, of all men most
redoubtable! Succour Patroklos, for whose body is terrible battle afoot
before the ships. There slay they one another, these guarding the dead
corpse, while the men of Troy are fierce to hale him unto windy Ilios,
and chiefliest noble Hector is fain to drag him, and his heart biddeth
him fix the head on the stakes of the wall when he hath sundered it
from the tender neck. But arise, lie thus no longer! let awe enter thy
heart to forbid that Patroklos become the sport of dogs of Troy. Thine
were the shame if he go down mangled amid the dead.”

Then answered her fleet-footed noble Achilles: “Goddess Iris, what god
sent thee a messenger unto me?”

And to him again spake wind-footed fleet Iris: “It was Hera that sent
me, the wise wife of Zeus, nor knoweth the high-throned son of Kronos
nor any other of the Immortals that on snowy Olympus have their
dwelling-place.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer to her and said: “And how may I
go into the fray? The Trojans hold my arms; and my dear mother bade me
forbear to array me until I behold her with my eyes returned, for she
promised to bring fair armour from Hephaistos. Other man know I none
whose noble armour I might put on, save it were the shield of Aias
Telamol’s son. But himself, I ween, is in the forefront of the press,
dealing death with his spear around Patroklos dead.”

Then again spake unto him wind-footed fleet Iris: “Well are we also
aware that thy noble armour is held from thee. But go forth unto the
trench as thou art and show thyself to the men of Troy, if haply they
will shrink back and refrain them from battle, and the warlike sons of
the Achaians take breath.”

Thus spake fleet-footed Iris and went her way. But Achilles dear to
Zeus arose, and around his strong shoulders Athene cast her tasselled
aegis, and around his head the bright goddess set a crown of a golden
cloud, and kindled therefrom a blazing flame. And as when a smoke
issueth from a city and riseth up into the upper air, from an island
afar off that foes beleaguer, while the others from their city fight
all day in hateful war,—but with the going down of the sun blaze out
the beacon-fires in line, and high aloft rusheth up the glare for
dwellers round about to behold, if haply they may come with ships to
help in need—thus from the head of Achilles soared that blaze toward
the heavens. And he went and stood beyond the wall beside the trench,
yet mingled not among the Achaians, for he minded the wise bidding of
his mother. There stood he and shouted aloud, and afar off Pallas
Athene uttered her voice, and spread terror unspeakable among the men
of Troy. Clear as the voice of a clarion when it soundeth by reason of
slaughterous foemen that beleaguer a city, so clear rang forth the
voice of Aiakides. And when they heard the brazen voice of Aiakides,
the souls of all of them were dismayed, and the horses of goodly manes
were fain to turn the chariots backward, for they boded anguish in
their hearts, And the charioteers were amazed when they saw the
unwearying fire blaze fierce on the head of the great-hearted son of
Peleus, for the bright-eyed goddess Athene made it blaze. Thrice from
over the trench shouted mightily noble Achilles, and thrice were the
men of Troy confounded and their proud allies. Yea there and then
perished twelve men of their best by their own chariot wheels and
spears. But the Achaians with joy drew Patroklos forth of the darts and
laid him on a litter, and his dear comrades stood around lamenting him;
and among them followed fleet-footed Achilles, shedding hot tears, for
his true comrade he saw lying on the bier, mangled by the keen bronze.
Him sent he forth with chariot and horses unto the battle, but home
again welcomed never more.

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen sent down the unwearying Sun to be gone
unwillingly unto the streams of Ocean. So the Sun set, and the noble
Achaians made pause from the stress of battle and the hazardous war.

But the Achaians all night made moan in lamentation for Patroklos. And
first of them in the loud lamentation was the son of Peleus, laying
upon the breast of his comrade his man-slaying hands and moaning very
sore, even as a deep-bearded lion whose whelps some stag-hunter hath
snatched away out of a deep wood; and the lion coming afterward
grieveth and through many glens he rangeth on the track of the
footsteps of the man, if anywhere he might find him, for most bitter
anger seizeth him;—thus Achilles moaning heavily spake among the
Myrmidons: “Ay me, vain verily was the word I uttered on that day when
I cheered the hero Menoitios in his halls and said that I would bring
back to Opoeis his son in glory from the sack of Ilios with the share
of spoil that should fall unto him. Not all the purposes of men doth
Zeus accomplish for them. It is appointed that both of us redden the
same earth with our blood here in Troy-land, for neither shall the old
knight Peleus welcome me back home within his halls, nor my mother
Thetis, but even here shall earth keep hold on me. Yet now, O
Patroklos, since I follow thee under earth, I will not hold thy funeral
till I have brought hither the armour and the head of Hector, thy
high-hearted slayer, and before thy pyre I will cut the throats of
twelve noble sons of the men of Troy, for mine anger thou art slain.
Till then beside the beaked ships shalt thou lie as thou art, and
around thee deep-bosomed women, Trojan and Dardanian, shall mourn thee
weeping night and day, even they whom we toiled to win by our strength
and, our long spears when we sacked rich cities of mortal men.”

Thus spake noble Achilles, and bade his comrades set a great tripod on
the fire, that with all speed they might wash from Patroklos the bloody
gore. So they set a tripod of ablution on the burning fire, and poured
therein water and took wood and kindled it beneath; and the fire
wrapped the belly of the tripod, and the water grew hot. And when the
water boiled in the bright bronze, then washed they him and anointed
with olive oil, and filled his wounds with fresh ointment, and laid him
on a bier and covered him with soft cloth from head to foot, and
thereover a white robe. Then all night around Achilles fleet of foot
the Myrmidons made lament and moan for Patroklos.

Meanwhile Zeus spake unto Hera his sister and wife: “Thou hast
accomplished this, O Hera, ox-eyed queen, thou hast aroused Achilles
fleet of foot. Verily of thine own children must the flowing-haired
Achaians be.”

Then answered unto him Hera the ox-eyed queen: “Most dread son of
Kronos, what is this word thou hast said? Truly even a man, I ween, is
to accomplish what he may for another man, albeit he is mortal and hath
not wisdom as we. How then was I who avow me the first of goddesses
both by birth and for that I am called thy wife, and thou art king
among all Immortals—how was I not in mine anger to devise evil against
the men of Troy?”

So debated they on this wise with one another. But Thetis of the silver
feet came unto the house of Hephaistos, imperishable, starlike, far
seen among the dwellings of Immortals, a house of bronze, wrought by
the crook-footed god himself. Him found she sweating in toil and busy
about his bellows, for he was forging tripods twenty in all to stand
around the wall of his stablished hall, and beneath the base of each he
had set golden wheels, that of their own motion they might enter the
assembly of the gods and again return unto his house, a marvel to look
upon. Thus much were they finished that not yet were away from the
fire, and gathered all his gear wherewith he worked into a silver
chest; and with a sponge he wiped his face and hands and sturdy neck
and shaggy breast, and did on his doublet, and took a stout staff and
went forth limping; but there were handmaidens of gold that moved to
help their lord, the semblances of living maids. In them is
understanding at their hearts, in them are voice and strength, and they
have skill of the immortal gods. These moved beneath their lord, and he
gat him haltingly near to where Thetis was, and set him on a bright
seat, and clasped her hand in his and spake and called her by her name:
“Wherefore, long-robed Thetis, comest thou to our house, honoured that
thou art and dear? No frequent comer art thou hitherto. Speak what thou
hast at heart; my soul is fain to accomplish it; if accomplish it I
can, and if it be appointed for accomplishment.”

Then answered unto him Thetis shedding tears: “Hephaistos, hath there
verily been any of all goddesses in Olympus that hath endured so many
grievous sorrows at heart as are the woes that Kronian Zeus hath laid
upon me above all others? He chose me from among the sisters of the sea
to enthrall me to a man, even Peleus Aiakos’ son, and with a man I
endured wedlock sore against my will. Now lieth he in his halls
forspent with grievous age, but other griefs are mine. A son he gave me
to bear and nourish, the chief of heroes, and he shot up like a young
branch. Like a plant in a very fruitful field I reared him and sent him
forth on beaked ships to Ilios to fight against the men of Troy, but
never again shall I welcome him back to his home within the house of
Peleus. And while he yet liveth in my sight and beholdeth the light of
the sun, he sorroweth, neither can I help him any whit though I go unto
him. The maiden whom the sons of the Achaians chose out to be his
prize, her hath the lord Agamemnon taken back out of his hands. In
grief for her wasted he his heart, while the men of Troy were driving
the Achaians on their ships, nor suffered them to come forth. And the
elders of the Argives entreated him, and told over many noble gifts.
Then albeit himself he refused to ward destruction from them, he put
his armour on Patroklos and sent him to the war, and much people with
him. All day they fought around the Skaian gates and that same day had
sacked the town, but that when now Menoitios’ valiant son had wrought
much harm, Apollo slew him in the forefront of the battle, and gave
glory unto Hector. Therefore now come I a suppliant unto thy knees, if
haply thou be willing to give my short-lived son shield and helmet, and
goodly greaves fitted with ankle-pieces, and cuirass. For the armour
that he had erst, his trusty comrade lost when he fell beneath the men
of Troy; and my son lieth on the earth with anguish in his soul.”

Then made answer unto her the lame god of great renown: “Be of good
courage, let not these things trouble thy heart. Would that so might I
avail to hide him far from dolorous death, when dread fate cometh upon
him, as surely shall goodly armour be at his need, such as all men
afterward shall marvel at, whatsoever may behold.”

Thus saying he left her there and went unto his bellows and turned them
upon the fire and bade them work. And the bellows, twenty in all, blew
on the crucibles, sending deft blasts on every side, now to aid his
labour and now anon howsoever Hephaistos willed and the work went on.
And he threw bronze that weareth not into the fire, and tin and
precious gold and silver, and next he set on an anvil-stand a great
anvil, and took in his hand a sturdy hammer, and in the other he took
the tongs.

First fashioned he a shield great and strong, adorning it all over, and
set thereto a shining rim, triple, bright-glancing, and therefrom a
silver baldric. Five were the folds of the shield itself; and therein
fashioned he much cunning work from his wise heart.

There wrought he the earth, and the heavens, and the sea, and the
unwearying sun, and the moon waxing to the full, and the signs every
one wherewith the heavens are crowned, Pleiads and Hyads and Oriol’s
might, and the Bear that men call also the Wain, her that turneth in
her place and watcheth Orion, and alone hath no part in the baths of
Ocean.

Also he fashioned therein two fair cities of mortal men. In the one
were espousals and marriage feasts, and beneath the blaze of torches
they were leading the brides from their chambers through the city, and
loud arose the bridal song. And young men were whirling in the dance,
and among them flutes and viols sounded high; and women standing each
at her door were marvelling. But the folk were gathered in the assembly
place; for there a strife was arisen, two men striving about the
blood-price of a man slain; the one claimed to pay full atonement,
expounding to the people, but the other denied him and would take
naught. And the folk were cheering both, as they took part on either
side. And heralds kept order among the folk, while the elders on
polished stones were sitting in the sacred circle, and holding in their
hands staves from the loud-voiced heralds. Then before the people they
rose up and gave judgment each in turn. And in the midst lay two
talents of gold, to be given unto him who should plead among them most
righteously.

But around the other city were two armies in siege with glittering
arms. And two counsels found favour among them, either to sack the town
or to share all with the townsfolk even whatsoever substance the fair
city held within. But the besieged were not yet yielding, but arming
for an ambushment. On the wall there stood to guard it their dear wives
and infant children, and with these the old men; but the rest went
forth, and their leaders were Ares and Pallas Athene, both wrought in
gold, and golden was the vesture they had on. Goodly and great were
they in their armour, even as gods, far seen around, and the folk at
their feet were smaller. And when they came where it seemed good to
them to lay ambush, in a river bed where there was a common
watering-place of herds, there they set them, clad in glittering
bronze. And two scouts were posted by them afar off to spy the coming
of flocks and of oxen with crooked horns. And presently came the
cattle, and with them two herdsmen playing on pipes, that took no
thought of the guile. Then the others when they beheld these ran upon
them and quickly cut off the herds of oxen and fair flocks of white
sheep, and slew the shepherds withal. But the besiegers, as they sat
before the speech-places [from which the orators spoke] and heard much
din among the oxen, mounted forthwith behind their high-stepping
horses, and came up with speed. Then they arrayed their battle and
fought beside the river banks, and smote one another with bronze-shod
spears. And among them mingled Strife and Tumult, and fell Death,
grasping one man alive fresh-wounded, another without wound, and
dragging another dead through the mellay by the feet; and the raiment
on her shoulders was red with the blood of men. Like living mortals
they hurled together and fought, and haled the corpses each of the
other’s slain.

Furthermore he set in the shield a soft fresh-ploughed field, rich
tilth and wide, the third time ploughed; and many ploughers therein
drave their yokes to and fro as they wheeled about. Whensoever they
came to the boundary of the field and turned, then would a man come to
each and give into his hands a goblet of sweet wine, while others would
be turning back along the furrows, fain to reach the boundary of the
deep tilth. And the field grew black behind and seemed as it were
a-ploughing, albeit of gold, for this was the great marvel of the work.

Furthermore he set therein the demesne-land of a king, where hinds were
reaping with sharp sickles in their hands. Some armfuls along the
swathe were falling in rows to the earth, whilst others the
sheaf-binders were binding in twisted bands of straw. Three
sheaf-binders stood over them, while behind boys gathering corn and
bearing it in their arms gave it constantly to the binders; and among
them the king in silence was standing at the swathe with his staff,
rejoicing in his heart. And henchmen apart beneath an oak were making
ready a feast, and preparing a great ox they had sacrificed; while the
women were strewing much white barley to be a supper for the hinds.

Also he set therein a vineyard teeming plenteously with clusters,
wrought fair in gold; black were the grapes, but the vines hung
throughout on silver poles. And around it he ran a ditch of cyanus, and
round that a fence of tin; and one single pathway led to it, whereby
the vintagers might go when they should gather the vintage. And maidens
and striplings in childish glee bare the sweet fruit in plaited
baskets. And in the midst of them a boy made pleasant music on a
clear-toned viol, and sang thereto a sweet Linos-song [probably a
lament for departing summer] with delicate voice; while the rest with
feet falling together kept time with the music and song.

Also he wrought therein a herd of kine with upright horns, and the kine
were fashioned of gold and tin, and with lowing they hurried from the
byre to pasture beside a murmuring river, beside the waving reed. And
herdsmen of gold were following with the kine, four of them, and nine
dogs fleet of foot came after them. But two terrible lions among the
foremost kine had seized a loud-roaring bull that bellowed mightily as
they haled him, and the dogs and the young men sped after him. The
lions rending the great bull’s hide were devouring his vitals and his
black blood; while the herdsmen in vain tarred on their fleet dogs to
set on, for they shrank from biting the lions but stood hard by and
barked and swerved away.

Also the glorious lame god wrought therein a pasture in a fair glen, a
great pasture of white sheep, and a steading, and roofed huts, and
folds.

Also did the glorious lame god devise a dancing-place like unto that
which once in wide Knosos Daidalos wrought for Ariadne of the lovely
tresses. There were youths dancing and maidens of costly wooing, their
hands upon one another’s wrists. Fine linen the maidens had on, and the
youths well-woven doublets faintly glistening with oil. Fair wreaths
had the maidens, and the youths daggers of gold hanging from silver
baldrics. And now would they run round with deft feet exceeding
lightly, as when a potter sitting by his wheel that fitteth between his
hands maketh trial of it whether it run: and now anon they would run in
lines to meet each other. And a great company stood round the lovely
dance in joy; and through the midst of them, leading the measure, two
tumblers whirled.

Also he set therein the great might of the River of Ocean around the
uttermost rim of the cunningly-fashioned shield.

Now when he had wrought the shield great and strong, then wrought he
him a corslet brighter than a flame of fire, and he wrought him a
massive helmet to fit his brows, goodly and graven, and set thereon a
crest of gold, and he wrought him greaves of pliant tin.

So when the renowned lame god had finished all the armour, he took and
laid it before the mother of Achilles. Then she like a falcon sprang
down from snowy Olympus, bearing from Hephaistos the glittering arms.



BOOK XIX.

How Achilles and Agamemnon were reconciled before the assembly of the
Achaians, and Achilles went forth with them to battle.


Now Morning saffron-robed arose from the streams of Ocean to bring
light to gods and men, and Thetis came to the ships, bearing his gift
from the god. Her dear son she found fallen about Patroklos and
uttering loud lament; and round him many of his company made moan. And
the bright goddess stood beside him in their midst, and clasped her
hand in his and spake and called upon his name: “My child, him who
lieth here we must let be, for all our pain, for by the will of gods
from the beginning was he brought low. But thou take from Hephaistos
arms of pride, arms passing goodly, such as no man on his shoulders yet
hath borne.”

Thus spake the goddess and in front of Aehifies laid the arms, and they
rang all again in their glory. And awe fell on all the Myrmidons, nor
dared any to gaze thereon, for they were awe-stricken. But when
Achilles looked thereon, then came fury upon him the more, and his eyes
blazed terribly forth as it were a flame beneath their lids: glad was
he as he held in his hands that splendid gift of a god. But when he had
satisfied his soul in gazing on the glory of the arms, straightway to
his mother spake he winged words: “My mother, the arms the god has
given are such as it beseemeth that the work of Immortals should be,
and that no mortal man should have wrought. Now therefore will I arm me
in them, but I have grievous fear lest meantime on the gashed wounds of
Menoitios’ valiant son flies light and breed worms therein, and defile
his corpse—for the life is slain out of him—and so all his flesh shall
rot.”

Then answered him Thetis, goddess of the silver feet: “Child, have no
care for this within thy mind. I will see to ward from him the cruel
tribes of flies which prey on men slain in fight: for even though he
lie till a whole year’s course be run, yet his flesh shall be sound
continually, or better even than now. But call thou the Achaian
warriors to the place of assembly, and unsay thy wrath against
Agamemnon shepherd of the host, and then arm swiftly for battle, and
clothe thee with thy strength.”

Thus saying she filled him with adventurous might, while on Patroklos
she shed ambrosia and red nectar through his nostrils, that his flesh
might abide the same continually.

But noble Achilles went down the beach of the sea, crying his terrible
cry, and roused the Achaian warriors. And they who before were wont to
abide in the circle of the ships, and they who were helmsmen and kept
the steerage of the ships, or were stewards there and dealt out food,
even these came then to the place of assembly, because Achilles was
come forth, after long ceasing from grievous war. Limping came two of
Ares’ company, Tydeus’ son staunch in fight and noble Odysseus, each
leaning on his spear, for their wounds were grievous still; and they
went and sate them down in the forefront of the assembly. And last came
Agamemnon king of men, with his wound upon him, for him too in the
stress of battle Kooen Antenor’s son had wounded with his bronze-tipped
spear. But when all the Achaians were gathered, then uprose
fleet-footed Achilles and spake in their midst: “Son of Atreus, was
this in any wise the better way for both thee and me, what time with
grief at our hearts we waxed fierce in soul-devouring strife for the
sake of a girl? Would that Artemis had slain her with her arrow at the
ships, on the day whereon I took her to me, when I had spoiled
Lyrnessos; so should not then so many Achaians have bitten the wide
earth beneath their enemies’ hands, by reason of my exceeding wrath. It
hath been well for Hector and the Trojans, but the Achaians I think
shall long remember the strife that was betwixt thee and me. But
bygones will we let be, for all our pain, and curb under necessity the
spirit within our breasts. I now will stay my anger: it beseems me not
implacably for ever to be wroth; but come rouse speedily to the fight
the flowing-haired Achaians, that I may go forth against the men of
Troy and put them yet again to the proof, if they be fain to couch hard
by the ships. Methinks that some among them shall be glad to rest their
knees when they are fled out of the fierceness of the battle, and from
before our spear.”

He spake, and the well-greaved Achaians rejoiced that the great-hearted
son of Peleus had made renouncement of his wrath. Then among them spake
Agamemnon king of men, speaking from the place where he sat, not arisen
to stand forth in their midst: “O Danaan friends and heroes, men of
Ares’ company, seemly is it to listen to him who standeth up to speak,
nor behoveth it to break in upon his words: even toward a skilled man
that were hard. For amid the uproar of many men how should one listen,
or yet speak? even the clearest-voiced speech is marred. To the son of
Peleus I will declare myself, but ye other Argives give heed, and each
mark well my word. Oft have the Achaians spoken thus to me, and
upbraided me; but it is not I who am the cause, but Zeus and Destiny
and Erinys that walketh in the darkness, who put into my soul fierce
madness on the day when in the assembly I, even I, bereft Achilles of
his meed. What could I do? it is God who accomplisheth all. Eldest
daughter of Zeus is Ate who blindeth all, a power of bane: delicate are
her feet, for not upon the earth she goeth, but walketh over the heads
of men, making men fall; and entangleth this one or that. Ye even Zeus
was blinded upon a time, he who they say is greatest among gods and
men; yet even him Hera with a female wile deceived, on the day when
Alkmene in fair-crowned Thebes was to bring forth the strength of
Herakles. For then proclaimed he solemnly among the gods: ‘Here me ye
all, both gods and goddesses, while I utter the council of my soul
within my heart. This day shall Eileithuia, the help of travailing
women, bring to the light a man who shall be lord over all that dwell
round about, among the raise of men who are sprung of me by blood.’ And
to him in subtlety queen Hera spake: ‘Though wilt play the cheat and
not accomplish thy word. Come now, Olympian, swear me a firm oath that
verily and indeed shall that man be lord over all that dwell round
about, who this day shall fall between a womal’s feet, even he among
all men who are of the lineage of thy blood.’ So spake she, and Zeus no
wise perceived her subtlety but sware a mighty oath, and therewith was
he sore blinded. For Hera darted from Olympus’ peak and came swiftly to
Achaian Argus, were she knew was the stately wife of Sthenelos son of
Perseus, who was also great with child, and her seventh month had come.
Her son Hera brought to the light, though his tale of months was
untold, but she stayed Alkmene’s bearing and kept the Eileithuiai from
her aid. Then she brought the tidings herself and to Kronos’ son Zeus
she spake: ‘Father Zeus of the bright lightning, a word will I speak to
thee for my heed. Today is born a man of valor who shall rule among the
Archives, Eurystheus, son of Sthenelos the son of Perseus, of thy
lineage; not unmeet is it that he be lord among Argives.’ She said, but
sharp pain smote him in the depths of his soul, and straightway he
seized Ate by her bright-haired head in the anger of his soul, and
sware a mighty oath that never again to Olympus and the starry heaven
should Ate come, who blindeth all alike. He said, and whirling her in
his hand flung her from the starry heaven, and quickly came she down
among the works of men. Yet ever he groaned against her when he beheld
his beloved son in cruel travail at Eurystheus’ hest. Thus also I, what
time great Hector of the glancing helm was slaying Argives at the
sterns of our ships, could not be unmindful of Ate, who blinded me at
the first. But since thus blinded was I, and Zeus bereft me of my wit,
fain am I to make amends, and recompense manifold for the wrong. Only
arise thou to the battle and rouse the rest of the host. Gifts am I
ready to offer, even all that noble Odysseus went yesterday to promise
in thy hut. So, if thou wilt, stay awhile, though eager, from battle,
and squires shall take the gifts from my ship and carry them to thee,
that thou mayest see that what I give sufficeth thee.”

Then answered him Achilles swift of foot: “Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, for the gifts, to give them as it beseemeth, if
so thou wilt, or to withhold, is in thy choice. But now let us bethink
us of battle with all speed; this is no time to dally here with
subtleties, for a great work is yet undone. Once more must Achilles be
seen in the forefront of the battle, laying waste with his brazen spear
the battalions of the men of Troy. Thereof let each of you think as he
fighteth with his man.”

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him and said: “Nay yet, for all
thy valour, godlike Achilles, not against Ilios lead thou the sons of
Achaians fasting to fight the men of Troy, since not of short spell
shall the battle be, when once the ranks of men are met, and God shall
breathe valour into both. But bid the Achaians taste at the swift ships
food and wine; for thence is vigour and might. For no man fasting from
food shall be able to fight with the foe all day till the going down of
the sun; for though his spirit be eager for battle yet his limbs
unaware grow weary, and thirst besetteth him, and hunger, and his knees
in his going fail. But the man who having his fill of food and wine
fighteth thus all day against the enemy, his heart is of good cheer
within him, nor anywise tire his limbs, ere all give back from battle.
So come, disperse the host and bid them make ready their meal. And the
gifts let Agamemnon king of men bring forth into the midst of the
assembly, that all Achaians may behold them with their eyes, and thou
be glad at heart. And let him swear to thee an oath, standing in the
midst of the Argives, that he hath never gone up into the damsel’s bed
or lain with her, [O prince, as is the wont of man with woman]; and let
thine own spirit be placable within thy breast. Then let him make thee
a rich feast of reconcilement in his hut, that thou have nothing
lacking of thy right. And thou, son of Atreus, toward others also shalt
be more righteous hereafter; for no shame it is that a man that is a
king should make amends if he have been the first to deal violently.”

Then to him spake Agamemnon king of men: “Son of Laertes, I rejoice to
listen to thy speech; for rightfully hast thou told over all. And the
oath I am willing to swear, yea my heart biddeth it, nor will I
forswear myself before God. Let Achilles abide for a space, eager for
battle though he be, and all ye others abide together, until the gifts
come forth from my hut, and we make faithful oath with sacrifice. But
thee thyself I thus charge and bid. Choose thee young men, princes of
the Achaian folk, and bear my gifts from my ship, even all that we
promised yesterday to Achilles, and take with thee the women. And let
Talthybios speedily make me ready a boar-swine in the midst of the wide
Achaian host, to sacrifice to Zeus and to the Sun.”

And to him in answer swift-footed Achilles spake: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, at some other time were it even better
ye should be busied thus, when haply there shall be some pause of war,
and the spirit within my breast shall be less fierce. But now they lie
mangled on the field—even they whom Hector son of Priam slew, when Zeus
gave him glory—and ye call men to their food. Verily for my part I
would bid the sons of the Achaians to fight now unfed and fasting, and
with the setting sun make ready a mighty meal, when we shall have
avenged the shame. Till then down my throat at least nor food nor drink
shall go, since my comrade is dead, who in my hut is lying mangled by
the sharp spear, with his feet toward the door, and round him our
comrades mourn, wherefore in my heart to no thought of those matters,
but of slaying, and blood, and grievous moans of men.”

Then answered him Odysseus of many counsels: “O Achilles, Peleus’ son,
mightiest of Achaians far, better and mightier not a little art thou
than I with the spear, but in counsel I may surpass thee greatly, since
I was born first and know more things: wherefore let thy heart endure
to listen to my speech. Quickly have men surfeit of battle, of that
wherein the sword streweth most straw yet is the harvest scantiest,
[i.e., in a pitched battle there is little plunder, the hope of which
might help to sustain mel’s efforts in storming a town] when Zeus
inclineth his balance, who is disposer of the wars of men. But it
cannot be that the Achaians fast to mourn a corpse; for exceeding many
and thick fall such on every day; when then should there be rest from
toil? Nay, it behoveth to bury him who is dead, steeling our hearts,
when once we have wept him for a day; but such as are left alive from
hateful war must take thought of meat and drink, that yet more against
our foes we may fight relentlessly ever, clad in unyielding bronze.
Then let none of the host hold back awaiting other summons; this is the
summons, and ill shall it be for whoso is left behind at the Argive
ships; but all together as one we will rouse against the horse-taming
Trojans the fury of war.”

He spoke, and took with him the sons of noble Nestor, and Meges son of
Phyleus, and Thoas, and Meriones, and Lykomedes son of Kreiontes, and
Melanippos. And they went on their way to the hut of Agamemnon, Atreus’
son. Forthwith as the word was spoken so was the deed done. Seven
tripods they bare from the hut, as he promised him, and twenty bright
caldrons, and twelve horses, and anon they led forth women skilled in
goodly arts, seven, and the eighth was fair-faced Briseis. Then
Odysseus, having weighed ten talents of gold in all, led the way, and
with him young men of the Achaians bare the gifts. These they set in
the midst of the place of assembly, and Agamemnon rose up, and beside
that shepherd of the host stood Talthybios, whose voice was like a
god’s, and held a boar between his hands. And the son of Atreus drawing
with his hands his knife, which ever hung beside the mighty scabbard of
his sword, cut off the first hairs from the boar, and lifting up his
hands he prayed to Zeus, and all the Argives sat silent in their
places, duly hearkening to the king. And he prayed aloud, looking up to
the wide heaven: “Be Zeus before all witness, highest and best of the
gods, and Earth, and Sun, and Erinyes, who under earth take vengeance
upon men, whosoever for-sweareth himself, that never have I laid hand
on the damsel Briseis, neither to lie with her nor anywise else, but
she has abode untouched within my huts. And if aught that I swear be
false, may the gods give me all sorrows manifold, that they send on him
who sinneth against them in his oath.”

He said, and cut the boar’s throat with the pitiless knife. And the
body Taithybios whirled and threw into the great wash of the hoary sea,
to be the food of fishes; but Achilles arose up and spake in the midst
of the warrior Argives: “Father Zeus, sore madness dealest thou verily
to men. Never could the son of Atreus have stirred the soul within my
breast, nor led off the damsel implacably against my will, had not Zeus
willed that on many of the Achaians death should come. But now go forth
to your meal, that we may join battle thereupon.”

Thus he spake and dispersed the assembly with all speed. The rest were
scattered each to his own ship, but the great-hearted Myrmidons took up
the gifts, and bare them to the ship of godlike Achilles. And they laid
them in the huts and set the women there, and gallant squires drave the
horses among their troop.

But Briseis that was like unto golden Aphrodite, when she beheld
Patroklos mangled by the keen spear, fell about him and made shrill
lament, and tore with her hands her breast and tender neck, and
beautiful face. And she spake amid her weeping, that woman like unto
goddesses: “Patroklos, dearest to my hapless heart, alive I left thee
when I left this hut, but now, O prince of the people, I am come back
to find thee dead; thus evil ever followeth evil in my lot. My husband,
unto whom my father and lady mother gave me, I beheld before our city
mangled with the keen spear, and my three brothers whom my own mother
bore, my near and dear, who all met their day of doom. But thou, when
swift Achilles slew my husband and wasted godlike Mynes’ city, wouldest
ever that I should not even weep, and saidest that thou wouldst make me
godlike Achilles’ wedded wife, and that ye would take me in your ships
to Phthia and make me a marriage feast among the Myrmidons. Therefore
with all my soul I mourn thy death, for thou wert ever kind.”

Thus spake she weeping, and thereon the women wailed, in semblance for
Patroklos, but each for her own woe. But round Achilles gathered the
elders of the Achaians, praying him that he would eat; but he denied
them with a groan: “I pray you, if any kind comrade will hearken to me,
bid me not sate my heart with meat and drink, since terrible grief is
come upon me. Till the sun go down I will abide, and endure continually
until then.”

He spoke, and his speech made the other chiefs depart, but the two sons
of Atreus stayed, and noble Odysseus, and Nestor and Idomeneus and
Phoinox, ancient knight, soothing him in his exceeding sorrow, but he
could no whit be soothed until he had entered the mouth of bloody war.
And bethinking him he sighed very heavily and spake aloud: “Thou too, O
hapless, dearest of my friends, thyself wouldst verily of yore set
forth in out hut with ready speed a savoury meal, what time the
Achaians hasted to wage against the horse-taming Trojans dolorous war.
But now thou liest mangled, and my heart will none of meat and drink,
that stand within, for desire of thee. Nought worse than this could I
endure, not though I should hear of my father’s death, who now I ween
in Phthia is shedding big tears for lack of a son so dear, even me that
in an alien land for sake of baleful Helen do battle with the men of
Troy; nor though it were my beloved son who is reared for me in Skyros
(if still at least is godlike Neoptolemos alive). For hitherto had my
soul within me trusted that I alone should perish far from
horse-pasturing Argos, here in the Trojan land, but that thou shouldest
return to Phthia, so that thou mightest take me the child in thy swift
black ship from Skyros and show him everything—my substance and
servants, and high-roofed mighty hall. For Peleus I ween already must
be dead and gone, or else in feeble life he hath sorrow of age, and of
waiting ever for bitter news of me, till he hear that I am dead.”

Thus spake he weeping, and the elders mourned with him, bethinking them
what each had left at home. And when the son of Kronos beheld them
sorrowing he pitied them, and forthwith to Athene spake he winged
words: “My child, thou hast then left utterly the man of thy heart.
Hath Achilles then no longer a place within thy thought? He before the
steep-prowed ships sits mourning his dear comrade; the rest are gone to
their meal, but he is fasting and unfed. But go, distil into his breast
nectar and pleasant ambrosia, that no pains of hunger come on him.”

Thus saying he sped forward Athene who before was fain. And she, like a
falcon wide-winged and shrill-voiced, hurled herself forth from heaven
through the upper air. So while the Achaians were arming presently
throughout the camp, she in Achilles’ breast distilled nectar and
pleasant ambrosia, that grievous hunger might not assail his knees, and
then herself was gone to the firm house of her mighty father. Then the
Achaians poured forth from the swift ships. As when thick snowflakes
flutter down from Zeus, chill beneath the blast of Boreas born in the
upper air, so thick from the ships streamed forth bright glittering
helms and bossy shields, strong-plaited cuirasses and ashen spears. And
the sheen thereof went up to heaven and all the earth around laughed in
the flash of bronze, and there went a sound beneath the feet of the
men, and in the midst of them noble Achilles harnessed him. His teeth
gnashed together, and his eyes blazed as it were the flame of a fire,
for into his heart was intolerable anguish entered in. Thus wroth
against the men of Troy he put on the gift of the god, which Hephaistos
wrought him by his art. First on his legs he set the fair greaves
fitted with silver ankle-pieces, and next he donned the cuirass about
his breast. Then round his shoulders he slung the bronze sword
silver-studded; then lastly he took the great and strong shield, and
its brightness shone afar off as the mool’s. Or as when over the sea
there appeareth to sailors the brightness of a burning fire, and it
burneth on high among the mountains in some lonely steading—sailors
whom storm-blasts bear unwilling over the sea, the home of fishes, afar
from them they love:— so from Achilles’ goodly well-dight shield the
brightness thereof shot up toward heaven. And he lifted the stout
helmet and set it on his head, and like a star it shone, the horse-hair
crested helmet, and around it waved plumes of gold that Hephaistos had
set thick about the crest. Then noble Achilles proved him in his armour
to know whether it fitted unto him, and whether his glorious limbs ran
free; and it became to him as it were wings, and buoyed up the shepherd
of hosts.

And forth from its stand he drew his father’s spear, heavy and great
and strong: that spear could none other of the Achaians wield, but
Achilles alone awaited to wield it, the Pelian ashen spear that Cheiron
gave to his father dear, from a peak of Pelion, to be the death of
warriors. And Automedon and Alkimos went about to yoke the horses, and
put on them fair breast-straps, and bits within their jaws, and
stretched the reins behind to the firm-built chariot. Then Automedon
took the bright lash, fitted to his hand, and sprang up behind the
horses, and after him mounted Achilles armed, effulgent in his armour
like bright Hyperion. And terribly he called upon the horses of his
sire: “Xanthos and Balios, famed children of Podarge, in other sort
take heed to bring your charioteer safe back to the Danaan host, when
we have done with battle, and leave him not as ye left Patroklos to lie
there dead.”

Then the horse Xanthos of glancing feet made answer unto him from
beneath the yoke;—and he bowed with his head, and all his mane fell
from the yoke-cushion beside the yoke and touched the ground;—for the
white-armed goddess Hera gave him speech: “Yea verily for this hour,
dread Achilles, we will still bear thee safe, yet is thy death day nigh
at hand, neither shall we be cause thereof, but a mighty god, and
forceful Fate. For not through sloth or heedlessness of ours did the
men of Troy from Patrokios’ shoulders strip his arms, but the best of
the gods, whom bright-haired Leto bore, slew him in the forefront of
the battle, and to Hector gave renown. We even with the wind of Zephyr,
swiftest, they say, of all winds, well might run; nathless to thee
thyself it is appointed to be slain in fight by a god and by a man.”

Now when he had thus spoken the Erinyes stayed his voice. And sore
troubled did fleet-footed Achilles answer him: “Xanthos, why
prophesiest thou my death? no wise behoveth it thee. Well know I of
myself that it is appointed me to perish here, far from my father dear
and mother; howbeit anywise I will not refrain till I give the Trojans
surfeit of war.”

He said, and with a cry among the foremost held on his whole-hooved
steeds.



BOOK XX.

How Achilles made havoc among the men of Troy.


So by the beaked ships around thee, son of Peleus, hungry for war, the
Achaians armed; and over against them the men of Troy, upon the high
ground of the plain.

But Zeus bade Themis call the gods to council from many-folded Olympus’
brow; and she ranged all about and bade them to the house of Zeus.
There was no River came not up, save only Ocean, nor any nymph, of all
that haunt fair thickets and springs of rivers and grassy
water-meadows. And they came to the house of Zeus who gathereth the
clouds, and sat them down in the polished colonnades which Hephaistos
in the cunning of his heart had wrought for father Zeus.

Thus gathered they within the doors of Zeus; nor was the Earthshaker
heedless of the goddess’ call, but from the salt sea came up after the
rest, and set him in the midst, and inquired concerning the purpose of
Zeus: “Wherefore, O Lord of the bright lightning, hast thou called the
gods again to council? Say, ponderest thou somewhat concerning the
Trojans and Achaians? for lo, the war and the fighting of them are
kindled very nigh.”

And Zeus, who gathered the clouds, answered him, saying: “Thou knowest,
O Earthshaker, the purpose within my breast, wherefor I gathered you
hither; even in their perishing have I regard unto them. But for me I
will abide here, sitting within a fold of Olympus, where I will gladden
my heart with gazing; but go all ye forth that ye come among the
Trojans and Achaians and succour these or those, howsoever each of you
hath a mind. For if Achilles alone shall fight against the Trojans, not
even a little while shall they hold back the son of Peleus, the fleet
of foot. Nay, but even aforetime they trembled when they looked upon
him; now therefore that his wrath for his friend is waxen terrible I
fear me lest he overleap the bound of fate, and storm the wall.”

Thus spake the son of Kronos, and roused unabating war. For on this
side and on that the gods went forth to war: to the company of the
ships went Hera, and Pallas Athene, and Poseidon, Earth-enfolder, and
the Helper Hermes, pro-eminent in subtle thoughts; and with these went
Hephaistos in the greatness of his strength, halting, but his shrunk
legs moved nimbly under him: but to the Trojans went Ares of the
glancing helm, and with him Phoebus of the unshorn hair, and archer
Artemis, and Leto and Xanthos and laughter-loving Aphrodite.

Now for so long as gods were afar from mortal men, so long waxed the
Achaians glorious, for that Achilles was come forth among them, and his
long ceasing from grim battle was at an end. And the Trojans were
smitten with sore trembling in the limbs of every one of them, in
terror when they beheld the son of Peleus, fleet of foot, blazing in
his arms, peer of man-slaying Ares. But when among the mellay of men
the Olympians were come down, then leapt up in her might Strife, rouser
of hosts, then sent forth Athene a cry, now standing by the hollowed
trench without the wall, and now on the echoing shores she shouted
aloud. And a shout uttered Ares against her, terrible as the blackness
of the storm, now from the height of the city to the Trojans calling
clear, or again along Simois shore over Kallikolon he sped.

So urged the blessed gods both hosts to battle, then themselves burst
into fierce war. And terribly thundered the father of gods and men from
heaven above; and from beneath Poseidon made the vast earth shake and
the steep mountain tops. Then trembled all the spurs of many-fountained
Ida, and all her crests, and the city of the Trojans, and the ships of
the Achaians. And the Lord of the Underworld, Aiedoneus, had terror in
hell, and leapt from his throne in that terror and cried aloud, lest
the world be cloven above him by Poseidon, Shaker of earth, and his
dwelling-place be laid bare to mortals and immortals—grim halls, and
vast, and lothly to the gods. So loud the roar rose of that battle of
gods. For against King Poseidon stood Phoebus Apollo with his winged
arrows, and against Enyalios stood Athene, bright-eyed goddess, and
against Hera she of the golden shafts and echoing chase, even archer
Artemis, sister of the Far-darter; and against Leto the strong Helper
Hermes, and against Hephaistos the great deep-eddying River, whom gods
call Xanthos and men Skamandros.

Thus gods with gods were matched. Meanwhile Achilles yearned above all
to meet Hector, son of Priam, in the fray; for with that blood
chiefliest his spirit bade him sate Ares, stubborn lord of war. But
straightway Apollo, rouser of hosts, moved Aineias to go to meet the
son of Peleus, and filled him with brave spirit: and he made his own
voice like the voice of Lykaon the son of Priam; in his semblance spake
Apollo, son of Zeus: “Aineias, counsellor of Trojans, where now are thy
threats wherewith thou didst boast to the Trojan lords over thy wine,
saying thou wouldest stand up in battle against Achilles, Peleus’ son?”

And to him Aineias answered and said: “Son of Priam, why biddest thou
me thus face the fierce son of Peleus in battle, though I be not fain
thereto? Not for the first time now shall I match me with Achilles,
fleet of foot; once before drave he me with his spear from Ida, when he
harried our kine and wasted Lyrnessos and Pedasos; but Zeus delivered
me out of his hand and put strength into my knees that they were swift.
Else had I fallen beneath the hands of Achilles, and of Athene who went
before and gave him light, and urged him to slay Leleges and Trojans
with his spear of bronze. Therefore it is impossible for man to face
Achilles in fight, for that ever some god is at his side to ward off
death. Ay, and at any time his spear flieth straight, neither ceaseth
till it have pierced through flesh of man. But if God once give us fair
field of battle, not lightly shall he overcome me, not though he boast
him made of bronze throughout.”

And to him in answer spake Apollo son of Zeus: “Yea, hero, pray thou
too to the everliving gods; for thou too, men say, wast born of
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus, and Achilles’ mother is of less degree
among the gods. For thy mother is child of Zeus, his but of the Ancient
One of the Sea. Come, bear up thy unwearying spear against him, let him
no wise turn thee back with revilings and bitter words.”

He said, and breathed high spirit into the shepherd of the host, and he
went onward through the forefront of the fighting, harnessed in
flashing bronze. But white-armed Hera failed not to discern Anchises’
son as he went through the press of men to meet the son of Peleus, and
gathering the gods about her she spake among them thus: “Consider ye
twain, Poseidon and Athene, within your hearts, what shall come of
these things that are done. Here is Aineias gone forth harnessed in
flashing bronze, to meet the son of Peleus, and it is Phoebus Apollo
that hath sent him. Come then, be it ours to turn him back straightway;
or else let some one of us stand likewise beside Achilles and give him
mighty power, so that he fail not in his spirit, but know that they who
love him are the best of the Immortals, and that they who from of old
ward war and fighting from the Trojans are vain as wind. All we from
Olympus are come down to mingle in this fight that he take no hurt
among the Trojans on this day—afterward he shall suffer whatsoever
things Fate span for him with her thread, at his beginning, when his
mother bare him. If Achilles learn not this from voice divine, then
shall he be afraid when some god shall come against him in the battle;
for gods revealed are hard to look upon.”

Then to her made answer Poseidon, Shaker of the earth: “Hera, be not
fierce beyond wisdom; it behoveth thee not. Not fain am I at least to
match gods with gods in strife. Let us go now into some high place
apart and seat us there to watch, and battle shall be left to men. Only
if Ares or Phoebus Apollo fall to fighting, or put constraint upon
Achilles and hinder him from fight, then straightway among us too shall
go up the battle-cry of strife; right soon, methinks, shall they hie
them from the issue of the fray back to Olympus to the company of the
gods, overcome by the force of our hands.”

Thus spake the blue-haired god, and led the way to the mounded wall of
heaven-sprung Herakles, that lofty wall built him by the Trojans and
Pallas Athene, that he might escape the monster and be safe from him,
what time he should make his onset from the beach to the plain. There
sate them down Poseidon and the other gods, and clothed their shoulders
with impenetrable cloud. And they of the other part sat down on the
brows of Kallikolon around thee, Archer Phoebus, and Ares waster of
cities. Thus they on either side sat devising counsels, but shrank all
from falling to grievous war, and Zeus from his high seat commanded
them.

Meanwhile the whole plain was filled with men and horses and ablaze
with bronze; and the earth rang with the feet of them as they rushed
together in the fray. Two men far better than the rest were meeting in
the midst between the hosts, eager for battle, Aineias, Anchises’ son,
and noble Achilles. First came on Aineias threateningly, tossing his
strong helm; his rapid shield he held before his breast, and brandished
his bronze spear. And on the other side the son of Peleus rushed to
meet him like a lion, a ravaging lion whom men desire to slay, a whole
tribe assembled: and first he goeth his way unheeding, but when some
warrior youth hath smitten him with a spear, the he gathereth himself
open-mouthed, and foam cometh forth about his teeth, and his stout
spirit groaneth in his heart, and with his tail he scourgeth either
side his ribs and flanks and goadeth himself on to fight, and glaring
is borne straight on them by his passion, to try whether he shall slay
some man of them, or whether himself shall perish in the forefront of
the throng: thus was Achilles driven of his passion and valiant spirit
to go forth to meet Aineias great of heart. And when they were come
near against each other, then first to Aineias spake fleet-footed noble
Achilles: “Aineias, wherefore hast thou so far come forward from the
crowd to stand against me: doth thy heart bid thee fight with me in
hope of holding Priam’s honour and lordship among the horse-taming
Trojans? Nay, though thou slay me, not for that will Priam lay his
kingdom in thy hands, for he hath sons, and is sound and of unshaken
mind. Or have the Trojans allotted thee some lot of ground more choice
than all the rest, fair land of tilth and orchard, that thou mayest
dwell therein, if thou slay me? But methinks thou wilt find the slaying
hard; for once before, I ween, have I made thee flee before my spear.
Host thou forgotten the day when thou wert alone with the kine, and I
made thee run swift-footed down Ida’s steeps in haste?—then didst thou
not look behind thee in thy flight. Thence fleddest thou to Lernessos,
but I wasted it, having fought against it with the help of Athene and
of father Zeus, and carried away women captive, bereaving them of their
day of freedom: only thee Zeus shielded, and other gods. But not this
time, methinks, shall they shield thee, as thou imaginest in thy heart:
therefore I bid thee go back into the throng and come not forth against
me, while as yet thou art unhurt—after the event even a fool is wise.”

Then to him in answer again Aineias spake: “Son of Peleus, think not
with words to affright me as a child, since I too well know myself how
to speak taunts and unjust speech. We know each other’s race and
lineage in that we have heard the fame proclaimed by mortal men, but
never hast thou set eyes on my parents, or I on thine. Thou, they say,
art son of nobie Peleus, and of Thetis of the fair tresses, the
daughter of the sea: the sire I boast is Anchises great of heart, and
my mother is Aphrodite. Of these shall one pair or the other mourn
their dear son today; for verily not with idle words shall we two
satisfy our strife and depart out of the battle. But, if thou wilt,
learn also this, that thou mayest well know our lineage, known to full
many men: First Zeus the cloud-gatherer begat Dardanos, and he
stablished Dardania, for not yet was holy Ilios built upon the plain to
be a city of mortal men, but still they dwelt on slopes of
many-fountained Ida. Then Dardanos begat a son, king Erichthonios, who
became richest of mortal men. Three thousand mares had he that pastured
along the marsh meadow, rejoicing in their tender foals. Of them was
Boreas enamoured as they grazed, and in semblance of a dark-maned horse
he covered them: then they having conceived bare twelve fillies. These
when they bounded over Earth the grain-giver would run upon the topmost
ripened ears of corn and break them not; and when they bounded over the
broad backs of the sea they would run upon the crests of the breakers
of the hoary brine. Then Erichthonios begat Tros to be load over the
Trojans, and to Tros three noble sons were born, Ilos and Assarakos and
godlike Ganymedes, who became the most beautiful of mortal men. Him the
gods caught up to be cupbearer to Zeus, for sake of his beauty, that he
might dwell among immortals. Then Ilos again begat a son, noble
Laomedon, and Laomedon begat Tithonos and Priam and Lamppos and Klytios
and Hiketaon, of the stock of Ares. And Assarakos begat Kapys, and
Kapys Anchises, and Anchises me; but Priam begat the goodly Hector.

“Lo then of this blood and lineage declare I myself unto thee. But for
valour, Zeus increaseth it in men or minisheth it according as he will,
for he is lord of all. But come, let us talk thus together no longer
like children, standing in mid onset of war. For there are revilings in
plenty for both of us to utter—a hundred-thwarted ship would not
suffice for the load of them. Glib is the tongue of man, and many words
are therein of every kind, and wide is the range of his speech hither
and thither. Whatsoever word thou speak, such wilt thou hear in answer.
But what need that we should bandy strife and wrangling each against
each. Not by speech shalt thou turn me from the battle that I desire,
until we have fought together, point to point: come then, and
straightway we will each try the other with bronze-headed spears.”

He said, and against that other’s dread and mighty shield hurled his
great spear, and the shield rang loud beneath the spear-point. And the
son of Peleus held away the shield from him with his stout hand, in
fear, for he thought that the far-shadowing spear of Aineias great of
heart would lightly pierce it through—fond man, and knew not in his
mind and heart that not lightly do the glorious gifts of gods yield to
force of mortal men. So did not the great spear of wise Aineias pierce
that shield, for the gold resisted it, even the gift of the god. Yet
through two folds he drave it, but three remained, for five folds had
the lame god welded, two bronze, and two inside of tin, and one of
gold; therein was stayed the ashen spear.

Then Achilles in his turn hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote
upon the circle of the shield of Aineias, beneath the edge of the rim,
where the bronze ran thinnest round, and the bull-hide was thinnest
thereon; and right through sped the Pelian ashen spear, and the shield
cracked under it. And Aineias crouched and held up the shield away from
him in dread; and the spear flew over his back and fixed itself in the
earth, having divided asunder the two circles of the sheltering shield.
And having escaped the long spear he stood still, and a vast anguish
drowned his eyes, affrighted that the spear was planted by him so nigh.
But Achilles drew his sharp sword and furiously made at him, crying his
terrible cry: then Aineias grasped in his hand a stone (a mighty deed)
such as two men, as men now are, would not avail to lift, but he with
ease wielded it all alone. Then would Aineias have smitten him with the
stone as he charged, either on helm or shield, which had warded from
him bitter death, and then would the son of Peleus have closed and
slain him with his sword, had not Poseidon, Shaker of earth, marked it
with speed, and straightway spoken among the immortal gods: “Alas, woe
is me for Aineias great of heart, who quickly will go down to Hades
slain by the son of Peleus, for that he will obey the words of Apollo
the far-darter, fond man, but nowise shall the god help him from
grievous death. But wherefore now is he to suffer ill in his innocence,
causelessly for others’ wickedness, yet welcome ever are his offerings
to the gods who inhabit the spacious heaven? Come, let us guide him out
of death’s way, lest the son of Kronos be wroth, if Achilles slay him;
for it is appointed to him to escape, that the race of Dardanos perish
not without seed or sign, even Dardanos whom the son of Kronos loved
above all the children born to him from the daughters of men. For the
race of Priam hath Zeus already hated. But thus shall the might of
Aineias reign among the Trojans, and his childrel’s children, who shall
be born in the aftertime.”

And him then answered Hera the ox-eyed queen: “Shaker of earth, thyself
with thine own mind take counsel, whether thou wilt save Aineias, or
leave him [to be slain, brave though he be, by Achilles, Peleus’ son].
For by many oaths among all the Immortals have we two sworn, even
Pallas Athene and I, never to help the Trojans from their evil day, not
even when all Troy shall burn in the burning of fierce fire, and they
that burn her shall be the warlike sons of the Achaians.”

Now when Poseidon Shaker of earth heard that, he went up amid the
battle and the clash of spears, and came where Aineias and renowned
Achilles were. Then presently he shed mist over the eyes of Achilles,
Peleus’ son, and drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of
Aineias great of heart, and set it before Achilles’ feet, and lifted
Aineias and swung him high from off the earth. Over many ranks of
warriors, of horses many, sprang Aineias soaring in the hand of the
god, and lighted at the farthest verge of the battle of many onsets,
where the Kaukones were arraying them for the fight. Then hard beside
him came Poseidon, Shaker of earth, and spake aloud to him winged
words: “Aineias, what god is it that biddeth thee fight infatuate
against Peleus’ vehement son, who is both a better man than thou and
dearer to Immortals? Rather withdraw thee whensoever thou fallest in
with him, lest even contrary to thy fate thou enter the house of Hades.
But when Achilles shall have met his death and doom, then be thou of
good courage to fight among the foremost, for there shall none other of
the Achaians slay thee.”

He spoke, and left him there, when he had shown him all these things.
Then quickly from Achilles’ eyes he purged the magic mist; and he
stared with wide eyes, and in trouble spake unto his proud soul: “Ha!
verily a great marvel behold I here with mine eyes. My spear lieth here
upon the ground, nor can I anywise see the man at whom I hurled it with
intent to slay him. Truly then is Aineias likewise dear to the immortal
gods, howbeit I deemed that his boosting thereof was altogether vanity.
Away with him! not again will he find heart to make trial of me, now
that once more he has escaped death to his joy. But come, I will call
on the warlike Danaans and go forth to make trial of some other Trojan
face to face.”

He said, and leapt along the lines, and called upon each man: “No
longer stand afar from the men of Troy, noble Achaians, but come let
man match man and throw his soul into the fight. Hard is it for me,
though I be strong, to assail so vast a folk and fight them all: not
even Ares, though an immortal god, nor Athene, could plunge into the
jaws of such a fray and toil therein. But to my utmost power with hands
and feet and strength no whit, I say, will I be slack, nay, never so
little, but right through their line will I go forward, nor deem I that
any Trojan shall be glad who shall come nigh my spear.”

Thus spake he urging them. But to the Trojans glorious Hector called
aloud, and proclaimed that he would go forth against Achilles:
“High-hearted Trojans, fear not Peleus’ son. I too in words could fight
even Immortals, but with the spear it were hard, for they are stronger
far. Neither shall Achilles accomplish all his talk, but part thereof
he is to accomplish, and part to break asunder in the midst. And
against him will I go forth, though the hands of him be even as fire,
yea though his hands be as fire and his fierceness as the flaming
steel.”

Thus spake he urging them, and the Trojans raised their spears for
battle; and their fierceness was mingled confusedly, and the battle-cry
arose. Then Phoebus Apollo stood by Hector and spake to him: “Hector,
no longer challenge Achilles at all before the lines, but in the throng
await him and from amid the roar of the battle, lest haply he spear
thee or come near and smite thee with his sword.”

Thus spake he, and Hector again fell back into the crowd of men, for he
was amazed when he heard the sound of a god’s voice.

But Achilles sprang in among the Trojans, his heart clothed with
strength, crying his terrible cry, and first he took Iphition,
Otrynteus’ valiant son, a leader of much people, born of a Naiad nymph
to Otrynteus waster of cities, beneath snowy Tmolos, in Hyde’s rich
domain. Him as he came right on did goodly Achilles smite with his
hurled spear, down through the midst of his head, and it was rent
asunder utterly. And he fell with a crash, and goodly Achilles exulted
over him; “here is thy death, thy birth was on the Gygaian lake, where
is thy sire’s demesne, by Hyllos rich in fish and eddying Hermos.”

Thus spake he exultant, but darkness fell upon the eyes of Iphition:
him the chariots of the Achaians clave with their tires asunder in the
forefront of the battle, and over him Achilles pierced in the temples,
through his bronze-cheeked helmet, Demoleon, brave stemmer of battle,
Antenor’s son. No stop made the bronze helmet, but therethrough sped
the spear-head and clave the bone, and the brain within was all
scattered: that stroke made ending of his zeal. Then Hippodamas, as he
leapt from his chariot and fled before him, Achilles wounded in the
back with his spear: and he breathed forth his spirit with a roar, as
when a dragged bull roareth that the young men drag to the altar of the
Lord of Helike; for in such hath the Earthshaker his delight: thus
roared Hippodamas as from his bones fled forth his haughty spirit. But
Achilles with his spear went on after godlike Polydoros, Priam’s son.
Him would his sire continually forbid to fight, for that among his
children he was youngest born and best beloved, and overcame all in
fleetness of foot. Just then in boyish folly, displaying the swiftness
of his feet, he was rushing through the forefighters, until he lost his
life. Him in the midst did fleet-footed noble Achilles smite with a
javelin, in his back as he darted by, where his belt’s golden buckles
clasped, and the breast and back plates overlapped: and right through
beside the navel went the spear-head, and he fell on his knee with a
cry, and dark cloud covered him round about, and he clasped his bowels
to him with his hands as he sank.

Then when Hector saw his brother Polydoros clasping his bowels with his
hands, and sinking to the earth, a mist fell over his eyes, nor longer
might he endure to range so far apart, but he came up against Achilles
brandishing his sharp spear, and like flame of fire. And Achilles when
he saw him, sprang up, and spake exultingly: “Behold the man who hath
deepest stricken into my soul, who slew my dear-prized friend; not long
shall we now shrink from each other along the highways of the war.”

He said, and looking grimly spake unto goodly Hector: “Come thou near,
that the sooner thou mayest arrive at the goal of death.”

Then to him, unterrified, said Hector of the glancing helm: “Son of
Peleus, think not with words to affright me as a child, since I too
know myself how to speak taunts and unjust speech. And I know that thou
art a man of might, and a far better man than I. Yet doth this issue
lie in the lap of the gods, whether I though weaker shall take thy life
with my hurled spear, for mine too hath been found keen ere now.”

He said, and poised his spear and hurled it, and Athene with a breath
turned it back from glorious Achilles, breathing very lightly; and it
came back to goodly Hector, and fell there before his feet. Then
Achilles set fiercely upon him, eager to slay him, crying his terrible
cry. But Apollo caught Hector up, very easily, as a god may, and hid
him in thick mist. Thrice then did fleet-footed noble Achilles make
onset with his spear of bronze, and thrice smote the thick mist. [But
when the fourth time he had come godlike on,] then with dread shout he
spake to him winged words: “Dog, thou art now again escaped from death;
yet came ill very nigh thee; but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to
whom thou must surely pray when thou goest forth amid the clash of
spears. Verily I will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any
god is helper of me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I
may seize.”

Thus speaking he pierced Dryops in the midst of his neck with his
spear, and he fell down before his feet. But he left him where he lay,
and hurled at Demuchos Philetor’s son, a good man and a tall, and
stayed him with a stroke upon his knees; then smote him with his mighty
sword and reft him of life. Then springing on Laogonos and Dardanos,
sons of Bias, he thrust both from their chariot to the ground, one with
a spear-cast smiting and the other in close battle with his sword. Then
Tros, Alastor’s son—he came and clasped his knees to pray him to spare
him, and let him live, and slay him not, having compassion on his like
age, fond fool, and knew not that he might not gain his prayers; for
nowise soft of heart or tender was that man, but of fierce mood—with
his hands he touched Achilles’ knees, eager to entreat him, but he
smote him in the liver with his sword, and his liver fell from him, and
black blood therefrom filled his bosom, and he swooned, and darkness
covered his eyes. Then Achilles came near and struck Mulios in the ear,
and right through the other ear went the bronze spear-head. Then he
smote Agenor’s son Echeklos on the midst of the head with his hilted
sword, and all the sword grew hot thereat with blood; and dark death
seized his eyes, and forceful fate. Then next Deukalion, just where the
sinews of the elbow join, there pierced he him through the forearm with
his bronze spear-head; so abode he with his arm weighed down, beholding
death before him; and Achilles smiting the neck with his sword swept
far both head and helm, and the marrow rose out of the backbone, and
the corpse lay stretched upon the earth. Then went he onward after
Peires’ noble son, Rhigmos, who had come from deep-soiled Thrace: him
in the midst he smote with his hurled javelin, and the point fixed in
his lung, and he fell forth of his chariot. And Areithoos his squire,
as he turned the horses round, he pierced in the back with his sharp
spear, and thrust him from the car, and the horse ran wild with fear.

As through deep glens rageth fierce fire on some parched mountain-side,
and the deep forest burneth, and the wind driving it whirleth every way
the flame, so raged he every way with his spear, as it had been a god,
pressing hard on the men he slew; and the black earth ran with blood.
For even as when one yoketh wide-browed bulls to tread white barley in
a stablished threshing-floor, and quickly is it trodden out beneath the
feet of the loud-lowing bulls, thus beneath great-hearted Achilles his
whole-hooved horses trampled corpses and shields together; and with
blood all the axletree below was sprinkled and the rims that ran around
the car, for blood-drops from the horses’ hooves splashed them, and
blood-drops from the tires of the wheels. But the son of Peleus pressed
on to win him glory, flecking with gore his irresistible hands.



BOOK XXI.

How Achilles fought with the River, and chased the men of Troy within
their gates.


But when now they came unto the ford of the fair-flowing river, even
eddying Xanthos, whom immortal Zeus begat, there sundering them he
chased the one part to the plain toward the city, even where the
Achaians were flying in affright the day before, when glorious Hector
was in his fury—thither poured some in flight, and Hera spread before
them thick mist to hinder them:—but half were pent into the
deep-flowing silver eddied river, and fell therein with a mighty noise,
and the steep channel sounded, and the banks around rang loudly; for
with shouting they swam therein hither and thither whirled round the
eddies. And as when at the rush of fire locusts take wing to fly unto a
river, and the unwearying fire flameth forth on them with sudden onset,
and they huddle in the water; so before Achilles was the stream of
deep-eddying Xanthos filled with the roar and the throng of horses and
men.

Then the seed of Zeus left behind him his spear upon the bank, leant
against tamarisk bushes, and leapt in, as it were a god, keeping his
sword alone, and devised grim work at heart, and smote as he turned him
every way about: and their groaning went up ghastly as they were
stricken by the sword, and the water reddened with blood. As before a
dolphin of huge maw fly other fish and fill the nooks of some
fair-havened bay, in terror, for he devoureth amain whichsoever of them
he may catch; so along the channels of that dread stream the Trojans
crouched beneath the precipitous sides. And when his hands were weary
of slaughter he chose twelve young men alive out of the river, an
atonement for Patroklos, Menoitios’ son that was dead. These brought he
forth amazed like fawns, and bound behind them their hands with
well-cut thongs, which they themselves wore on their pliant doublets,
and gave them to his comrades to lead down to the hollow ships. Then
again he made his onset, athirst for slaying.

There met he a son of Dardanid Priam, in flight out of the river,
Lykaon, whom once himself he took and brought unwilling out of his
father’s orchard, in a night assault; he was cutting with keen bronze
young shoots of a wild fig tree, to be hand-rails of a chariot; but to
him an unlooked-for bane came goodly Achilles. And at that time he sold
him into well-peopled Lemnos, sending him on ship board, and the son of
Jason gave a price for him; and thence a guest friend freed him with a
great ransom, Eetion of Imbros, and sent him to goodly Arisbe; whence
flying secretly he came to his father’s house. Eleven days he rejoiced
among his friends after he was come from Lemnos, but on the twelfth
once more God brought him into the hands of Achilles, who was to send
him to the house of Hades though nowise fain to go. Him when
fleet-footed noble Achilles saw bare of helm and shield, neither had he
a spear, but had thrown all to the ground; for he sweated grievously as
he tried to flee out of the river, and his knees were failing him for
weariness: then in wrath spake Achilles to his great heart: “Ha! verily
great marvel is this that I behold with my eyes. Surely then will the
proud Trojans whom I have slain rise up again from beneath the murky
gloom, since thus hath this man come back escaped from his pitiless
fate, though sold into goodly Lemnos, neither hath the deep of the
hoary sea stayed him, that holdeth many against their will. But come
then, of our spear’s point shall he taste, that I may see and learn in
my mind whether likewise he shall come back even from beneath, or
whether the life-giving Earth shall hold him down, she that holdeth so
even the strong.”

Thus pondered he in his place; but the other came near amazed, fain to
touch his knees, for his soul longed exceedingly to flee from evil
death and black destruction. Then goodly Achilles lifted his long spear
with intent to smite him, but he stooped and ran under it and caught
his knees; and the spear went over his back and stood in the ground,
hungering for flesh of men. Then Lykaon besought him, with one hand
holding his knees, while with the other he held the sharp spear and
loosed it not, and spake to him winged words: “I cry thee mercy,
Achilles; have thou regard and pity for me: to thee, O fosterling of
Zeus, am I in the bonds of suppliantship. For at thy table first I
tasted meal of Demeter on the day when thou didst take me captive in
the well-ordered orchard, and didst sell me away from my father and my
friends unto goodly Lemnos, and I fetched thee the price of a hundred
oxen. And now have I been ransomed for thrice that, and this is my
twelfth morn since I came to Ilios after much pain. Now once again hath
ruinous fate delivered me unto thy hands; surely I must be hated of
father Zeus, that he hath given me a second time unto thee; and to
short life my mother bare me, Laothoe, old Altes’ daughter—Altes who
ruleth among the war-loving Leleges, holding steep Pedasos on the
Satnioeis. His daughter Priam had to wife, with many others, and of her
were we two born, and thou wilt butcher both. Him among the foremost of
the foot-soldiers didst thou lay low, even godlike Polydoros, when thou
smotest him with they sharp spear: and now will it go hard with me
here, for no hope have I to escape thy hands, since God hath delivered
me thereunto. Yet one thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to
heart: slay me not, since I am not of the same mother as Hector, who
slew thy comrade the gentle and brave.”

Thus spake to him the noble son of Priam, beseeching him with words,
but he heard a voice implacable: “Fond fool, proffer me no ransom, nor
these words. Until Patroklos met his fated day, then was it welcomer to
my soul to spare the men of Troy, and many I took alive and sold beyond
the sea: but now there is none shall escape death, whomsoever before
Ilios God shall deliver into my hands—yes, even among all Trojans, but
chiefest among Priam’s sons. Ay, friend, thou too must die: why
lamentest thou? Patroklos is dead, who was better far than thou. Seest
thou not also what manner of man am I for might and goodliness? and a
good man was my father, and a goddess mother bare me. Yet over me too
hang death and forceful fate. There cometh morn or eve or some noonday
when my life too some man shall take in battle, whether with spear he
smite or arrow from the string.”

Thus spake he, and the other’s knees and heart were unstrung. He let go
Achilles’ spear, and sat with both hands outspread. But Achilles drew
his sharp sword and smote on the collar-bone beside the neck, and all
the two-edged sword sank into him, and he lay stretched prone upon the
earth, and blood flowed dark from him and soaked the earth. Him seized
Achilles by the foot and sent him down the stream, and over him
exulting spake winged words: “There lie thou among the fishes, which
shall lick off thy wound’s blood heedlessly, nor shall thy mother lay
thee on a bed and mourn for thee, but Skamandros shall bear thee on his
eddies into the broad bosom of the sea. Leaping along the wave shall
many a fish dart up to the dark ripple to eat of the white flesh of
Lykaon. So perish all, until we reach the citadel of sacred Ilios, ye
flying and I behind destroying. Nor even the River, fair-flowing,
silver-eddied, shall avail you, to whom long time forsooth ye sacrifice
many bulls, and among his eddies throw whole-hooved horses down alive.
For all this yet shall ye die the death, until ye pay all for
Patroklos’ slaying and the slaughter of Achaians whom at the swift
ships ye slew while I tarried afar.”

Thus spake he, but the River waxed ever more wroth in his heart, and
sought in his soul how he should stay goodly Achilles from his work,
and ward destruction from the Trojans. Meanwhile the son of Peleus with
his far-shadowing spear leapt, fain to slay him, upon Asteropaios son
of Pelegon, whom wide-flowing Axios begat of Periboia eldest of the
daughters of Akessamenos. Upon him set Achilles, and Asteropaios stood
against him from the river, holding two spears; for Xanthos put courage
into his heart, being angered for the slaughtered youths whom Achilles
was slaughtering along the stream and had no pity on them. Then when
the twain were come nigh in onset on each other, unto him first spake
fleet-footed noble Achilles: “Who and whence art thou of men, that
darest to come against me? Ill-fated are they whose children match them
with my might.”

And to him, made answer Pelegol’s noble son: “High-hearted son of
Peleus, why askest thou my lineage? I come from deep-soiled Paionia, a
land far off, leading Paionian men with their long spears, and this now
is the eleventh morn since I am come to Ilios. My lineage is of
wide-flowing Axios, who begat Pelegon famous with the spear, and he,
men say, was my father. Now fight we, noble Achilles!”

Thus spake he in defiance, and goodly Achilles lifted the Pelian ash:
but the warrior Asteropaios hurled with both spears together, for he
could use both hands alike, and with the one spear smote the shield,
but pierced it not right through, for the gold stayed it, the gift of a
god; and with the other he grazed the elbow of Achilles’ right arm, and
there leapt forth dark blood, but the point beyond him fixed itself in
the earth, eager to batten on flesh. Then in his turn Achilles hurled
on Asteropaios his straight-flying ash, fain to have slain him, but
missed the man and struck the high bank, and quivering half its length
in the bank he left the ashen spear. Then the son of Peleus drew his
sharp sword from his thigh and leapt fiercely at him, and he availed
not to draw with his stout hand Achilles’ ashen shaft from the steep
bank. Thrice shook he it striving to draw it forth, and thrice gave up
the strain, but the fourth time he was fain to bend and break the ashen
spear of the seed of Aiakos, but ere that Achilles closing on him reft
him of life with his sword. For in the belly he smote him beside the
navel, and all his bowels gushed out to the earth, and darkness covered
his eyes as he lay gasping. Then Achilles trampling on his breast
stripped off his armour and spake exultingly: “Lie there! It is hard to
strive against children of Kronos’ mighty son, even though one be
sprung from a River-god. Thou truly declarest thyself the seed of a
wide-flowing River, but I avow me of the linkage of great Zeus. My sire
is a man ruling many Myrmidons, Peleus the son of Aiakos, and Aiakos
was begotten of Zeus. As Zeus is mightier than seaward-murmuring
rivers, so is the seed of Zeus made mightier than the seed of a river.
Nay, there is hard beside thee a great river, if he may anywise avail;
but against Zeus the son of Kronos it is not possible to fight. For him
not even king Acheloios is match, nor yet the great strength of
deep-flowing Ocean, from whom all rivers flow and every sea, and all
springs and deep wells: yea, even he hath fear of the lightning of
great Zeus and his dread thunder, when it pealeth out of heaven.”

He said, and from the steep bank drew his bronze spear, and left there
Asteropaios whom he had slain, lying in the sands, and the dark water
flooded him. Around him eels and fishes swarmed, tearing and gnawing
the fat about his kidneys. But Achilles went on after the charioted
Paiones who still along the eddying river huddled in fear, when they
saw their best man in the stress of battle slain violently by the hands
and the sword of the son of Peleus. There slew he Thersilochos and
Mydon and Astypylos and Mnesos and Thrasios and Ainios and Ophelestes;
and more yet of the Paiones would swift Achilles have slain, had not
the deep-eddying River called unto him in wrath, in semblance of a man,
and from an eddy’s depth sent forth a voice: “O Achilles, thy might and
thy evil work are beyond the measure of men; for gods themselves are
ever helping thee. If indeed the son of Kronos hath delivered thee all
the Trojans to destroy, at least drive them forth from me and do thy
grim deeds on the plain, for filled with dead men is my pleasant bed,
nor can I pour my stream to the great sea, being choked with dead, and
thou slayest ruthlessly. Come then, let be; I am astonished, O captain
of hosts.”

And to him answered Achilles fleet of foot: “So be it, heaven-sprung
Skamandros, even as thou biddest. But the proud Trojans I will not
cease from slaying until I have driven them into their city, and have
made trial with Hector face to face whether he is to vanquish me or I
him.”

Thus saying, he set upon the Trojans, like a god. Then unto Apollo
spake the deep-eddying River: “Out on it, lord of the silver bow, child
of Zeus, thou hast not kept the ordinance of Kronos’ son, who charged
thee straitly to stand by the Trojans and to help them, until eve come
with light late-setting, and darken the deep-soiled earth.”

He said, and spear-famed Achilles sprang from the bank and leapt into
his midst; but he rushed on him in a furious wave, and stirred up all
his streams in tumult, and swept down the many dead who lay thick in
him, slain by Achilles; these out to land he cast with bellowing like a
bull, and saved the living under his fair streams, hiding them within
eddies deep and wide. But terribly around Achilles arose his tumultuous
wave, and the stream smote violently against his shield, nor availed he
to stand firm upon his feet. Then he grasped a tall fair-grown elm, and
it fell uprooted and tore away all the bank, and reached over the fair
river bed with its thick shoots, and stemmed the River himself, falling
all within him: and Achilles, struggling out of the eddy, made haste to
fly over the plain with his swift feet, for he was afraid. But the
great god ceased not, but arose upon him with darkness on his crest,
that he might stay noble Achilles from slaughter, and ward destruction
from the men of Troy. And the son of Peleus rushed away a spear’s
throw, with the swoop of a black eagle, the mighty hunter, strongest at
once and swiftest of winged birds. Like him he sped, and on his breast
the bronze rang terribly as he fled from beneath the onset, and behind
him the River rushed on with a mighty roar. As when a field-waterer
from a dark spring leadeth water along a bed through crops and garden
grounds, a mattock in his hands, casting forth hindrances from the
ditch, and as it floweth all pebbles are swept down, and swiftly
gliding it murmureth down a sloping place, and outrunneth him that is
its guide:—thus ever the river wave caught up Achilles for all his
speed; for gods are mightier than men. For whensoever fleet-footed
noble Achilles struggled to stand against it, and know whether all
immortals be upon him who inhabit spacious heaven, then would a great
wave of the heaven-sprung River beat upon his shoulders from above, and
he sprang upward with his feet, sore vexed at heart; and the River was
wearying his knees with violent rush beneath, devouring the earth from
under his feet. Then the son of Peleus cried aloud, looking up to the
broad heaven: “Zeus, Father, how doth none of the gods take it on him
in pity to save me from the River! after that let come to me what may.
None other of the inhabitants of Heaven is chargeable so much, but only
my dear mother, who beguiled me with false words, saying that under the
wall of the mail-clad men of Troy I must die by the swift arrows of
Apollo. Would that Hector had slain me, the best of men bred here: then
brave had been the slayer, and a brave man had he slain. But now by a
sorry death am I doomed to die, pent in this mighty river, like a
swineherd boy whom a torrent sweepeth down as he essayeth to cross it
in a storm.”

Thus spake he, and quickly Poseidon and Athene came near and stood
beside him, in the likeness of men, and taking his hands in theirs
pledged him in words. And the first that spake was Poseidon, Shaker of
the earth: “Son of Peleus, tremble not, neither be afraid; such helpers
of thee are we from the gods, approved of Zeus, even Pallas Athene and
I, for to be vanquished of a river is not appointed thee, but he will
soon give back, and thou wilt thyself perceive it: but we will give
thee wise counsel, if thou wilt obey it; hold not thy hand from
hazardous battle until within Ilios’ famous walls thou have pent the
Trojan host, even all that flee before thee. But do thou, when thou
hast taken the life of Hector, go back unto the ships; this glory we
give unto thee to win.”

They having thus spoken departed to the immortals, but he toward the
plain—for the bidding of gods was strong upon him—went onward; and all
the plain was filled with water-flood, and many beautiful arms and
corpses of slain youths were drifting there. So upward sprang his knees
as he rushed against the stream right on, nor stayed him the
wide-flowing River, for Athene put great strength in him. Neither did
Skamandros slacken his fierceness, but yet more raged against the son
of Peleus, and he curled crestwise the billow of his stream, lifting
himself on high, and on Simoeis he called with a shout: “Dear brother,
the strength of this man let us both join to stay, since quickly he
will lay waste the great city of king Priam, and the Trojans abide not
in the battle. Help me with speed, and fill thy streams with water from
thy springs, and urge on all thy torrents, and raise up a great wave,
and stir huge roaring of tree-stumps and stones, that we may stay the
fierce man who now is lording it, and deeming himself match for gods.
For neither, I ween, will strength avail him nor comeliness anywise,
nor that armour beautiful, which deep beneath the flood shall be
o’erlaid with slime, and himself I will wrap him in my sands and pour
round him countless shingle without stint, nor shall the Achaians know
where to gather his bones, so vast a shroud of silt will I heap over
them. Where he dieth there shall be his tomb, neither shall he have
need of any barrow to be raised, when the Achaians make his funeral.”

He said, and rushed in tumult on Achilles, raging from on high,
thundering with foam and blood and bodies of dead men. Then did a dark
wave of the heaven-sprung River stand towering up and overwhelm the son
of Peleus. But Hera cried aloud in terror of Achilles, lest the great
deep-eddying River sweep him away, and straightway she called to
Hephaistos, her dear son: “Rise, lame god, O my son; it was against
thee we thought that eddying Xanthos was matched in fight. Help with
all speed, put forth large blast of flame. Then will I go to raise a
strong storm out of the sea of the west wind and the white south which
shall utterly consume the dead Trojans and their armour, blowing the
angry flame. Thou along Xanthos’ banks burn up his trees and wrap
himself in fire, nor let him anywise turn thee back by soft words or by
threat, nor stay thy rage—only when I cry to thee with my voice, then
hold the unwearying fire.”

Thus spake she, and Hephaistos made ready fierce-blazing fire. First on
the plain fire blazed, and burnt the many dead who lay there thick,
slain by Achilles; and all the plain was parched and the bright water
stayed. And as when in late summer the north wind swiftly parcheth a
new watered orchard, and he that tilleth it is glad, thus was the whole
plain parched, and Hephaistos consumed the dead; then against the river
he turned his gleaming flame. Elms burnt and willow trees and
tamarisks, and lotos burnt and rush and galingale which round the fair
streams of the river grew in multitude. And the eels and fishes beneath
the eddies were afflicted, which through the fair streams tumbled this
way and that, in anguish at the blast of crafty Hephaistos. And the
strong River burned, and spake and called to him by name: “Hephaistos,
there is no god can match with thee, nor will I fight thee thus ablaze
with fire. Cease strife, yea, let noble Achilles drive the Trojans
forthwith out of their city; what have I to do with strife and
succour?”

Thus spake he, burnt with fire, for his fair streams were bubbling. And
as a cauldron boileth within, beset with much fire, melting the lard of
some fatted hog spurting up on all sides, and logs of firewood lie
thereunder,—so burned his fair streams in the fire, and the water
boiled. He had no mind to flow, but refrained him, for the breath of
cunning Hephaistos violently afflicted him. Then unto Hera, earnestly
beseeching her,’ he spake winged words: “Hera, wherefore hath thy son
assailed my stream to vex it above others? I am less chargeable than
all the rest that are helpers of the Trojans. But lo, I will give over,
if thou wilt, and let thy son give over too. And I further will swear
even this, that never will I ward the day of evil from the Trojans, not
even when all Troy is burning in the blaze of hungry fire, and the
warlike sons of Achaians are the burners thereof.”

Then when the white-armed goddess Hera heard his speech, straightway
she spake unto Hephaistos her dear son: “Hephaistos, hold, famed son;
it befitteth not thus for mortals’ sake to do violence to an immortal
god.”

Thus said she and Hephaistos quenched the fierce-blazing fire, and the
wave once more rolled down the fair river-bed.

So when the rage of Xanthos was overcome, both ceased, for Hera stayed
them, though in wrath. But among the other gods fell grievous bitter
strife, and their hearts were carried diverse in their breasts. And
they clashed together with a great noise, and the wide earth groaned,
and the clarion of great Heaven rang around. Zeus heard as he sate upon
Olympus, and his heart within him laughed pleasantly when he beheld
that strife of gods. Then no longer stood they asunder, for Ares
piercer of shields began the battle and first made for Athene with his
bronze spear, and spake a taunting word: “Wherefore, O dogfly, dost
thou match gods with gods in strife, with stormy daring, as thy great
spirit moveth thee? Rememberest thou not how thou movedst Diomedes
Tydeus’ son to wound me, and thyself didst take a visible spear and
thrust it straight at me and pierce through my fair skin? Therefore
deem I now that thou shalt pay me for all that thou hast done.”

Thus saying he smote on the dread tasselled aegis that not even the
lightning of Zeus can overcome—thereon smote bloodstained Ares with his
long spear. But she, giving back, grasped with stout hand a stone that
lay upon the plain, black, rugged, huge, which men of old time set to
be the landmark of a field; this hurled she, and smote impetuous Ares
on the neck, and unstrung his limbs. Seven roods he covered in his
fall, and soiled his hair with dust, and his armour rang upon him. And
Pallas Athene laughed, and spake to him winged words exultingly: “Fool,
not even yet hast thou learnt how far better than thou I claim to be,
that thus thou matchest thy might with mine. Thus shalt thou satisfy
thy mother’s curses, who deviseth mischief against thee in her wrath,
for that thou hast left the Achaians and givest the proud Trojal’s
aid.”

Thus having said she turned from him her shining eyes. Him did
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus take by the hand and lead away, groaning
continually, for scarce gathered he his spirit back to him. But when
the white-armed goddess Hera was aware of them, straightway she spake
unto Athene winged words: “Out on it, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,
maiden invincible, lo there the dogfly is leading Ares destroyer of men
out of the fray of battle down the throng—nay then, pursue her.”

She said, and Athene sped after her with heart exultant, and made at
her and smote her with stout hand upon the breast, and straightway her
knees and heart were unstrung. So they twain lay on the bounteous
earth, and she spake winged words exultingly: “Such let all be who give
the Trojans aid when they fight against the mailed Argives. Be they
even so bold and brave as Aphrodite when she came to succour Ares and
defied my might. Then should we long ago have ceased from war, having
laid waste the stablished citadel of Ilios.”

[She said, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled.] Then to Apollo
spake the earth-shaking lord: “Phoebus, why stand we apart? It
befitteth not after the rest have begun: that were the more shameful if
without fighting we should go to Olympus to the bronze-thresholded
house of Zeus. Begin, for thou art younger; it were not meet for me,
since I was born first and know more. Fond god, how foolish is thy
heart! Thou rememberest not all the ills we twain alone of gods endured
at Ilios, when by ordinance of Zeus we came to proud Laomedon and
served him through a year for promised recompense, and he laid on us
his commands. I round their city built the Trojans a wall, wide and
most fair, that the city might be unstormed, and thou Phoebus, didst
herd shambling crook-horned kine among the spurs of woody many-folded
Ida. But when the joyous seasons were accomplishing the term of hire,
then redoubtable Laomedon robbed us of all hire, and sent us off with
threats. He threatened that he would bind together our feet and hands
and sell us into far-off isles, and the ears of both of us he vowed to
shear off with the sword. So we went home with angry hearts, wroth for
the hire he promised and gave us not. To his folk not thou showest
favour, nor essayest with us how the proud Trojans may be brought low
and perish miserably with their children and noble wives.”

Then to him answered King Apollo the Far-darter: “Shaker of the earth,
of no sound mind wouldst thou repute me if I should fight against thee
for the sake of pitiful mortals, who like unto leaves now live in
glowing life, consuming the fruit of the earth, and now again pine into
death. Let us with all speed cease from combat, and let them do battle
by themselves.”

Thus saying he turned away, for he felt shame to deal in blows with his
father’s brother. But his sister upbraided him sore, the queen of wild
beasts, huntress Artemis, and spake a taunting word: “So then thou
fleest, Far-darter, hast quite yielded to Poseidon the victory, and
given him glory for naught! Fond god, why bearest thou an ineffectual
bow in vain? Let me not hear thee again in the halls of our sire boast
as before among the immortal gods thou wouldst stand up to fight
against Poseidon.”

Thus spake she, but far-darting Apollo answered her not. But angrily
the noble spouse of Zeus [upbraided the Archer Queen with taunting
words:] “How now art thou fain, bold vixen, to set thyself against me?
Hard were it for thee to match my might, bow-bearer though thou art,
since against women Zeus made thee a lion, and giveth thee to slay
whomso of them thou wilt. Truly it is better on the mountains to slay
wild beasts and deer than to fight amain with mightier than thou. But
if thou wilt, try war, that thou mayest know well how far stronger am
I, since thou matchest thy might with mine.”

She said, and with her left hand caught both the other’s hands by the
wrist, and with her right took the bow from off her shoulders, and
therewith, smiling, beat her on the ears as she turned this way and
that; and the swift arrows fell out of her quiver. And weeping from
before her the goddess fled like a dove that from before a falcon
flieth to a hollow rock, a cleft—for she was not fated to be
caught;—thus Artemis fled weeping, and left her bow and arrows where
they lay. Then to Leto spake the Guide, the slayer of Argus: “Leto,
with thee will I no wise fight; a grievous thing it is to come to blows
with wives of cloud-gathering Zeus; but boast to thy heart’s content
among the immortal gods that thou didst vanquish me by might and main.”

Thus said he, and Leto gathered up the curved bow and arrows fallen
hither and thither amid the whirl of dust: so taking her daughter’s bow
she went back. And the maiden came to Olympus, to the
bronze-thresholded house of Zeus, and weeping set herself on her
father’s knee, while round her her divine vesture quivered: and her
father, Kronos’ son, took her to him and asked of her, laughing gently:
“Who of the inhabitants of heaven, dear child, hath dealt with thee
thus [hastily, as though thou hadst been doing some wrong thing
openly]?”

And to him in answer spake the fair-crowned queen of the echoing chase:
“It was thy wife that buffeted me, father, the white-armed Hera, from
whom are strife and contention come upon the immortals.”

Thus talked they unto one another. Then Phoebus Apollo entered into
sacred Ilios, for he was troubled for the wall of the well-builded
city, lest the Danaans waste it before its hour upon that day. But the
other ever-living gods went to Olympus, some angry and some greatly
triumphing, and sat down beside Zeus who hideth himself in dark clouds.

Now Achilles was still slaying the Trojans, both themselves and their
whole-hooved horses. And as when a smoke goeth up to the broad heaven,
when a city burneth, kindled by the wrath of gods, and causeth toil to
all, and griefs to many, thus caused Achilles toil and griefs to the
Trojans. And the old man Priam stood on the sacred tower, and was aware
of dread Achilles, how before him the Trojans thronged in rout, nor was
any succour found of them. Then with a cry he went down from the tower,
to rouse the gallant warders along the walls: “Hold open the gates in
your hands until the folk come to the city in their rout, for closely
is Achilles chasing them—now trow I there will be deadly deeds. And
when they are gathered within the wall and are taking breath, then
again shut back the gate-wings firmly builded; for I fear lest that
murderous man spring in within the wall.”

Thus spake he, and they opened the gates and thrust back the bolts; and
the gates flung back gave safety. Then Apollo leapt forth to the front
that he might ward destruction from the Trojans. They straight for the
city and the high wall were fleeing, parched with thirst and
dust-grimed from the plain, and Achilles chased them vehemently with
his spear, for strong frenzy possessed his heart continually, and he
thirsted to win him renown. Then would the sons of the Achaians have
taken high-gated Troy, had not Phoebus Apollo aroused goodly Agenor,
Antenor’s son, a princely man and strong. In his heart he put good
courage, and himself stood by his side that he might ward off the
grievous visitations of death, leaning against the oak, and he was
shrouded in thick mist. So when Agenor was aware of Achilles waster of
cities, he halted, and his heart much wavered as he stood; and in
trouble he spake to his great heart: “Ay me, if I flee before mighty
Achilles, there where the rest are driven terror-struck, nathless will
he overtake me and slaughter me as a coward. Or what if I leave these
to be driven before Achilles the son of Peleus, and flee upon my feet
from the wall by another way to the Ileian plain, until I come to the
spurs of Ida, and hide me in the underwood? So then at evening, having
bathed in the river and refreshed me of sweat, I might return to Ilios.
Nay, why doth my heart debate thus within me? Lest he might be aware of
me as I get me from the city for the plain, and speeding after overtake
me with swift feet; then will it no more be possible to avoid the
visitation of death, for he is exceeding mighty above all mankind. What
then if in front of the city I go forth to meet him? Surely his flesh
too is penetrable by sharp bronze, and there is but one life within,
and men say he is mortal, howbeit Zeus the son of Kronos giveth him
renown.”

Thus saying, he gathered himself to await Achilles, and within him his
stout heart was set to strive and fight. As a leopardess goeth forth
from a deep thicket to affront a huntsman, nor is afraid at heart, nor
fleeth when she heareth the bay of hounds; for albeit the man first
smite her with thrust or throw, yet even pierced through with the spear
she ceaseth not from her courage until she either grapple or be slain,
so noble Antenor’s son, goodly Agenor, refused to flee till he should
put Achilles to the proof, but held before him the circle of his
shield, and aimed at him with his spear, and cried aloud: “Doubtless
thou hopest in thy heart, noble Achilles, on this day to sack the city
of the proud men of Troy. Fond man, there shall many woful things yet
be wrought before it, for within it we are many men and staunch, who in
front of our parents dear and wives and sons keep Ilios safe; but thou
shalt here meet death, albeit so redoubtable and bold a man of war.”

He said, and hurled his sharp spear with weighty hand, and smote him on
the leg beneath the knee, nor missed his mark, and the greave of
new-wrought tin rang terribly on him; but the bronze bounded back from
him it smote, nor pierced him, for the god’s gift drave it back. Then
the son of Peleus in his turn made at godlike Agenor, but Apollo
suffered him not to win renown, but caught away Agenor, and shrouded
him in thick mist, and sent him in peace to be gone out of the war.
Then by wile kept the son of Peleus away from the folk, for in complete
semblance of Agenor himself he stood before the feet of Achilles, who
hasted to run upon him and chase him. And while he chased him over the
wheat-bearing plain, edging him toward the deep-eddying river
Skamandros, as he ran but a little in front of him (for by wile Apollo
beguiled him that he kept ever hoping to overtake him in the race),
meantime the other Trojans in common rout came gladly unto their
fastness, and the city was filled with the throng of them. Neither had
they heart to await one another outside the city and wall, and to know
who might have escaped and who had perished in the fight, but
impetuously they poured into the city, whomsoever of them his feet and
knees might save.



BOOK XXII.

How Achilles fought with Hector, and slew him, and brought his body to
the ships.


Thus they throughout the city, scared like fawns, were cooling their
sweat and drinking and slaking their thirst, leaning on the fair
battlements, while the Achaians drew near the wall, setting shields to
shoulders. But Hector deadly fate bound to abide in his place, in front
of Ilios and the Skaian gates. Then to the son of Peleus spake Phoebus
Apollo: “Wherefore, son of Peleus, pursuest thou me with swift feet,
thyself being mortal and I a deathless god? Thou hast not even yet
known me, that I am a god, but strivest vehemently. Truly thou
regardest not thy task among the affliction of the Trojans whom thou
affrightedst, who now are gathered into the city, while thou heat
wandered hither. Me thou wilt never slay, for I am not subject unto
death.”

Then mightily moved spake unto him Achilles fleet of foot: “Thou hast
baulked me, Far-darter, most mischievous of all the gods, in that thou
hast turned me hither from the wall: else should full many yet have
bitten the dust or ever within Ilios had they come. Now hast thou
robbed me of great renown, and lightly hast saved them, because thou
hadst no vengeance to fear thereafter. Verily I would avenge me on
thee, had I but the power.”

Thus saying toward the city he was gone in pride of heart, rushing like
some victorious horse in a chariot, that runneth lightly at full speed
over the plain; so swiftly plied Achilles his feet and knees. Him the
old man Priam first beheld as he sped across the plain, blazing as the
star that cometh forth at harvest-time, and plain seen his rays shine
forth amid the host of stars in the darkness of night, the star whose
name men call Oriol’s Dog. Brightest of all is he, yet for an evil sign
is he set, and bringeth much fever upon hapless men. Even so on
Achilles’ breast the bronze gleamed as he ran. And the old man cried
aloud and beat upon his head with his hands, raising them on high, and
with a cry called aloud beseeching his dear son; for he before the
gates was standing, all hot for battle with Achilles. And the old man
spake piteously unto him, stretching forth his hands: “Hector, beloved
son, I pray thee await not this man alone with none beside thee, lest
thou quickly meet thy doom, slain by the son of Peleus, since he is
mightier far, a merciless man. Would the gods loved him even as do I!
then quickly would dogs and vultures devour him on the field—thereby
would cruel pain go from my heart—the man who hath bereft me of many
valiant sons, slaying them and selling them captive into far-off isles.
Ay even now twain of my children, Lykaon and Polydoros, I cannot see
among the Trojans that throng into the fastness, sons whom Laothoe bare
me, a princess among women. If they be yet alive amid the enemy’s host,
then will we ransom them with bronze and gold, for there is store
within, for much goods gave the old man famous Altes to his child. If
they be dead, then even in the house of Hades shall they be a sorrow to
my soul and to their mother, even to us who gave them birth, but to the
rest of the folk a briefer sorrow, if but thou die not by Achilles’
hand. Nay, come within the wall, my child, that thou preserve the men
and women of Troy, neither give great triumph to the son of Peleus, and
be thyself bereft of sweet life. Have compassion also on me, the
helpless one, who still can feel, ill-fated; whom the father, Kronos’
son, will bring to naught by a grievous doom in the path of old age,
having seen full many ills, his sons perishing and his daughters
carried away captive, and his chambers laid waste and infant children
hurled to the ground in terrible war, and his sons’ wives dragged away
by the ruinous hands of the Achaians. Myself then last of all at the
street door will ravening dogs tear, when some one by stroke or throw
of the sharp bronze hath bereft my limbs of life—even the dogs I reared
in my halls about my table and to guard my door, which then having
drunk my blood, maddened at heart shall lie in the gateway. A young man
all beseemeth, even to be slain in war, to be torn by the sharp bronze
and lie on the field; though he be dead yet is all honourable to him,
whate’er be seen: but when dogs defile the hoary head and hoary beard
of an old man slain, this is the most piteous thing that cometh upon
hapless men.”

Thus spake the old man, and grasped his hoary hairs, plucking them from
his head, but he persuaded not Hector’s soul. Then his mother in her
turn wailed tearfully, loosening the folds of her robe, while with the
other hand she showed her breast; and through her tears spake to him
winged words: “Hector, my child, have regard unto this bosom and pity
me, if ever I gave thee consolation of my breast. Think of it, dear
child, and from this side the wall drive back the foe, nor stand in
front to meet him. He is merciless; if he slay thee it will not be on a
bed that I or thy wife shall bewail thee, my own dear child, but far
away from us by the ships of the Argives will swift dogs devour thee.”

Thus they with wailing spake to their dear son, beseeching him sore,
yet they persuaded not Hector’s soul, but he stood awaiting Achilles as
he drew nigh in giant might. As a serpent of the mountains upon his den
awaiteth a man, having fed on evil poisons, and fell wrath hath entered
into him, and terribly he glared as he coileth himself about his den,
so Hector with courage unquenchable gave not back, leaning his shining
shield against a jutting tower. Then sore troubled he spake to his
great heart: “Ay me, if I go within the gates and walls, Polydamas will
be first to bring reproach against me, since he bade me lead the
Trojans to the city during this ruinous night, when noble Achilles
arose. But I regarded him not, yet surely it had been better far. And
now that I have undone the host by my wantonness, I am ashamed before
the men of Troy and women of trailing robes, lest at any time some
worse man than I shall say: ‘Hector by trusting his own might undid the
host.’ So will they speak; then to me would it be better far to face
Achilles and either slay him and go home, or myself die gloriously
before the city. Or what if I lay down my bossy shield and my stout
helm, and lean my spear against the wall, and go of myself to meet
noble Achilles and promise him that Helen, and with her all possessions
that Alexandros brought in hollow ships to Troy, the beginning of
strife, we will give to the Sons of Atreus to take away, and
therewithal to divide in half with the Achaians all else that this city
holdeth: and if thereafter I obtain from the Trojans an oath of the
Elders that they will hide nothing but divide all in twain [whatever
wealth the pleasant city hold within]? But wherefore doth my heart
debate thus? I might come unto him and he would not pity or regard me
at all, but presently slay me unarmed as it were but a woman, if I put
off my armour. No time is it now to dally with him from oaktree or from
rock, like youth with maiden, as youth and maiden hold dalliance one
with another. Better is it to join battle with all speed: let us know
upon which of us twain the Olympian shall bestow renown.”

Thus pondered he as he stood, but nigh on him came Achilles, peer of
Enyalios warrior of the waving helm, brandishing from his right
shoulder the Pelian ash, his terrible spear; and all around the bronze
on him flashed like the gleam of blazing fire or of the Sun as he
ariseth. And trembling seized Hector as he was aware of him, nor
endured he to abide in his place, but left the gates behind him and
fled in fear. And the son of Peleus darted after him, trusting in his
swift feet. As a falcon upon the mountains, swiftest of winged things,
swoopeth fleetly after a trembling dove; and she before him fleeth,
while he with shrill screams hard at hand still darteth at her, for his
heart urgeth him to seize her; so Achilles in hot haste flew straight
for him, and Hector fled beneath the Trojans’ wall, and plied swift
knees. They past the watch-place and wind-waved wild fig-tree sped
ever, away from under the wall, along the waggon-track, and came to the
two fair-flowing springs, where two fountains rise that feed
deep-eddying Skamandros. The one floweth with warm water, and smoke
goeth up therefrom around as it were from a blazing fire, while the
other even in summer floweth forth like cold hail or snow or ice that
water formeth. And there beside the springs are broad washing-troughs
hard by, fair troughs of stone, where wives and fair daughters of the
men of Troy were wont to wash bright raiment, in the old time of peace,
before the sons of the Achaians came. Thereby they ran, he flying, he
pursuing. Valiant was the flier but far mightier he who fleetly pursued
him. For not for beast of sacrifice or for an oxhide were they
striving, such as are prizes for mel’s speed of foot, but for the life
of horse-taming Hector was their race. And as when victorious
whole-hooved horses run rapidly round the turning-points, and some
great prize lieth in sight, be it a tripod or a woman, in honour of a
man that is dead, so thrice around Priam’s city circled those twain
with flying feet, and all the gods were gazing on them. Then among them
spake first the father of gods and men: “Ay me, a man beloved I see
pursued around the wall. My heart is woe for Hector, who hath burnt for
me many thighs of oxen amid the crests of many-folded Ida, and other
times on the city-height; but now is goodly Achilles pursuing him with
swift feet round Priam’s town. Come, give your counsel, gods, and
devise whether we shall save him from death or now at last slay him,
valiant though he be, by the hand of Achilles Peleus’ son.”

Then to him answered the bright-eyed goddess Athene: “O Father, Lord of
the bright lightning and the dark cloud, what is this thou hast said? A
man that is a mortal, doomed long ago by fate, wouldst thou redeem back
from ill-boding death? Do it, but not all we other gods approve.”

And unto her in answer spake cloud-gathering Zeus: “Be of good cheer,
Trito-born, dear child: not in full earnest speak I, and I would fain
be kind to thee. Do as seemeth good to thy mind, and draw not back.”

Thus saying he roused Athene, that already was set thereon, and from
the crests of Olympus she darted down.

But after Hector sped fleet Achilles chasing him vehemently. And as
when on the mountains a hound hunteth the fawn of a deer, having
started it from its covert, through glens and glades, and if it crouch
to baffle him under a bush, yet scenting it out the hound runneth
constantly until he find it; so Hector baffled not Peleus’ fleet-footed
son. Oft as he set himself to dart under the well-built walls over
against the Dardanian gates, if haply from above they might succour him
with darts, so oft would Achilles gain on him and turn him toward the
plain, while himself he sped ever on the city-side. And as in a dream
one faileth in chase of a flying man, the one faileth in his flight and
the other in his chase—so failed Achilles to overtake him in the race,
and Hector to escape. And thus would Hector have avoided the visitation
of death, had not this time been utterly the last wherein Apollo came
nigh to him, who nerved his strength and his swift knees. For to the
host did noble Achilles sign with his head, and forbade them to hurl
bitter darts against Hector, lest any smiting him should gain renown,
and he himself come second. But when the fourth time they had reached
the springs, then the Father hung his golden balances, and set therein
two lots of dreary death, one of Achilles, one of horse-taming Hector,
and held them by the midst and poised. Then Hector’s fated day sank
down, and fell to the house of Hades, and Phoebus Apollo left him. But
to Peleus’ son came the bright-eyed goddess Athene, and standing near
spake to him winged words: “Now verily, glorious Achilles dear to Zeus,
I have hope that we twain shall carry off great glory to the ships for
the Achaians, having slain Hector, for all his thirst for fight. No
longer is it possible for him to escape us, not even though far-darting
Apollo should travail sore, grovelling before the Father, aegis-bearing
Zeus. But do thou now stand and take breath, and I will go and persuade
this man to confront thee in fight.”

Thus spake Athene, and he obeyed, and was glad at heart, and stood
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen-spear. And she left him and came to
noble Hector, like unto Deiphobos in shape and in strong voice, and
standing near spake to him winged words: “Dear brother, verily fleet
Achilles doth thee violence, chasing thee round Priam’s town with swift
feet: but come let us make a stand and await him on our defence.”

Then answered her great Hector of the glancing helm: “Deiphobos, verily
aforetime wert thou far dearest of my brothers, but now methinks I
shall honour thee even more, in that thou hast dared for my sake, when
thou sawest me, to come forth of the wall, while the others tarry
within.”

Then to him again spake the bright-eyed goddess Athene: “Dear brother,
of a truth my father and lady mother and my comrades around besought me
much, entreating me in turn, to tarry there, so greatly do they all
tremble before him; but my heart within was sore with dismal grief. And
now fight we with straight-set resolve and let there be no sparing of
spears, that we may know whether Achilles is to slay us and carry our
bloody spoils to the hollow ships, or whether he might be vanquished by
thy spear.”

Thus saying Athene in her subtlety led him on. And when they were come
nigh in onset on one another, to Achilles first spake great Hector of
the glancing helm: “No longer, son of Peleus, will I fly thee, as
before I thrice ran round the great town of Priam, and endured not to
await thy onset. Now my heart biddeth me stand up against thee; I will
either slay or be slain. But come hither and let us pledge us by our
gods, for they shall be best witnesses and beholders of covenants: I
will entreat thee in no outrageous sort, if Zeus grant me to outstay
thee, and if I take thy life, but when I have despoiled thee of thy
glorious armour, O Achilles, I will give back thy dead body to the
Achaians, and do thou the same.”

But unto him with grim gaze spake Achilles fleet of foot: “Hector, talk
not to me, thou madman, of covenants. As between men and lions there is
no pledge of faith, nor wolves and sheep can be of one mind, but
imagine evil continually against each other, so is it impossible for
thee and me to be friends, neither shall be any pledge between us until
one or other shall have fallen and glutted with blood Ares, the
stubborn god of war. Bethink thee of all thy soldiership: now behoveth
it thee to quit thee as a good spearman and valiant man of war. No
longer is there way of escape for thee, but Pallas Athene will
straightway subdue thee to my spear; and now in one hour shalt thou pay
back for all my sorrows for my friends whom thou hast slain in the fury
of thy spear.”

He said, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled. And noble
Hector watched the coming thereof and avoided it; for with his eye on
it he crouched, and the bronze spear flew over him, and fixed itself in
the earth; but Pallas Athene caught it up and gave it back to Achilles,
unknown of Hector shepherd of hosts. Then Hector spake unto the noble
son of Peleus: “Thou hast missed, so no wise yet, godlike Achilles, has
thou known from Zeus the hour of my doom, though thou thoughtest it.
Cunning of tongue art thou and a deceiver in speech, that fearing thee
I might forget my valour and strength. Not as I flee shalt thou plant
thy spear in my reins, but drive it straight through my breast as I set
on thee, if God hath given thee to do it. Now in thy turn avoid my
spear of bronze. O that thou mightst take it all into thy flesh! Then
would the war be lighter to the Trojans, if but thou wert dead, for
thou art their greatest bane.”

He said, and poised his long-shadowed spear and hurled it, and smote
the midst of the shield of Peleus’ son, and missed him not: but far
from the shield the spear leapt back. And Hector was wroth that his
swift weapon had left his hand in vain, and he stood downcast, for he
had no second ashen spear. And he called with a loud shout to Deiphobos
of the white shield, and asked of him a long spear, but he was no wise
nigh. Then Hector knew he truth in his heart, and spake and said: “Ay
me, now verily the gods have summoned me to death. I deemed the warrior
Deiphobos was by my side, but he is within the wall, and it was Athene
who played me false. Now therefore is evil death come very nigh me, not
far off, nor is there way of escape. This then was from of old the
pleasure of Zeus and of the far-darting son of Zeus, who yet before
were fain to succour me: but now my fate hath found me. At least let me
not die without a struggle or ingloriously, but in some great deed of
arms whereof men yet to be born shall hear.”

Thus saying he drew his sharp sword that by his flank hung great and
strong, and gathered himself and swooped like a soaring eagle that
darteth to the plain through the dark clouds to seize a tender lamb or
crouching hare. So Hector swooped, brandishing his sharp sword. And
Achilles made at him, for his heart was filled with wild fierceness,
and before his breast he made a covering with his fair graven shield,
and tossed his bright four-plated helm; and round it waved fair golden
plumes [that Hephaistos had set thick about the crest.]. As a star
goeth among stars in the darkness of night, Hesperos, fairest of all
stars set in heaven, so flashed there forth a light from the keen spear
Achilles poised in his right hand, devising mischief against noble
Hector, eyeing his fair flesh to find the fittest place. Now for the
rest of him his flesh was covered by the fair bronze armour he stripped
from strong Patroklos when he slew him, but there was an opening where
the collar bones coming from the shoulders clasp the neck, even at the
gullet, where destruction of life cometh quickliest; there, as he came
on, noble Achilles drave at him with his spear, and right through the
tender neck went the point. Yet the bronze-weighted ashen spear clave
not the windpipe, so that he might yet speak words of answer to his
foe. And he fell down in the dust, and noble Achilles spake exultingly:
“Hector, thou thoughtest, whilst thou wert spoiling Patroklos, that
thou wouldst be safe, and didst reck nothing of me who was afar, thou
fool. But away among the hollow ships his comrade, a mightier far, even
I, was left behind, who now have unstrung thy knees. Thee shall dogs
and birds tear foully, but his funeral shall the Achaians make.”

Then with faint breath spake unto him Hector of the glancing helm: “I
pray thee by thy life and knees and parents leave me not for dogs of
the Achaians to devour by the ships, but take good store of bronze and
gold, gifts that my father and lady mother shall give to thee, and give
them home my body back again, that the Trojans and Trojans’ wives give
me my due of fire after my death.”

But unto him with grim gaze spake Achilles fleet of foot: “Entreat me
not, dog, by knees or parents. Would that my heart’s desire could so
bid me myself to carve and eat raw thy flesh, for the evil thou hast
wrought me, as surely is there none that shall keep the dogs from thee,
not even should they bring ten or twenty fold ransom and here weigh it
out, and promise even more, not even were Priam Dardanos’ son to bid
pay thy weight in gold, not even so shall thy lady mother lay thee on a
bed to mourn her son, but dogs and birds shall devour thee utterly.”

Then dying spake unto him Hector of the glancing helm: “Verily I know
thee and behold thee as thou art, nor was I destined to persuade thee;
truly thy heart is iron in thy breast. Take heed now lest I draw upon
thee wrath of gods, in the day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo slay thee,
for all thy valour, at the Skaian gate.”

He ended, and the shadow of death came down upon him, and his soul flew
forth of his limbs and was gone to the house of Hades, wailing her
fate, leaving her vigour and youth. Then to the dead man spake noble
Achilles: “Die: for my death, I will accept it whensoever Zeus and the
other immortal gods are minded to accomplish it.”

He said, and from the corpse drew forth his bronze spear, and set it
aside, and stripped the bloody armour from the shoulders. And other
sons of Achaians ran up around, who gazed upon the stature and
marvellous goodliness of Hector. Nor did any stand by but wounded him,
and thus would many a man say looking toward his neighbour: “Go to, of
a truth far easier to handle is Hector now than when he burnt the ships
with blazing fire.” Thus would many a man say, and wound him as he
stood hard by. And when fleet noble Achilles had despoiled him, he
stood up among the Achaians and spake winged words: “Friends, chiefs
and counsellors of the Argives, since the gods have vouchsafed us to
vanquish this man who hath done us more evil than all the rest
together, come let us make trial in arms round about the city, that we
may know somewhat of the Trojans’ purpose, whether since he hath fallen
they will forsake the citadel, or whether they are minded to abide,
albeit Hector is no more. But wherefore doth my heart debate thus?
There lieth by the ships a dead man unbewailed, unburied, Patroklos;
him will I not forget, while I abide among the living and my knees can
stir. Nay if even in the house of Hades the dead forget their dead, yet
will I even there be mindful of my dear comrade. But come, ye sons of
the Achaians, let us now, singing our song of victory, go back to the
hollow ships and take with us our foe. Great glory have we won; we have
slain the noble Hector, unto whom the Trojans prayed throughout their
city, as he had been a god.”

He said, and devised foul entreatment of noble Hector. The tendons of
both feet behind he slit from heel to ankle-joint, and thrust
therethrough thongs of ox-hide, and bound him to his chariot, leaving
his head to trail. And when he had mounted the chariot and lifted
therein the famous armour, he lashed his horses to speed, and they
nothing loth flew on. And dust rose around him that was dragged, and
his dark hair flowed loose on either side, and in the dust lay all his
once fair head, for now had Zeus given him over to his foes to entreat
foully in his own native land.

Thus was his head all grimed with dust. But his mother when she beheld
her son, tore her hair and cast far from her her shining veil, and
cried aloud with an exceeding bitter cry. And piteously moaned his
father, and around them the folk fell to crying and moaning throughout
the town. Most like it seemed as though all beetling Ilios were burning
utterly in fire. Scarcely could the folk keep back the old man in his
hot desire to get him forth of the Dardanian gates. For he besought
them all, casting himself down in the mire, and calling on each man by
his name: “Hold, friends, and though you love me leave me to get me
forth of the city alone and go unto the ships of the Achaians. Let me
pray this accursed horror-working man, if haply he may feel shame
before his age-fellows and pity an old man. He also hath a father such
as I am, Peleus, who begat and reared him to be a bane of Trojans—and
most of all to me hath he brought woe. So many sons of mine hath he
slain in their flower—yet for all my sorrow for the rest I mourn them
all less than this one alone, for whom my sharp grief will bring me
down to the house of Hades—even Hector. Would that he had died in my
arms; then would we have wept and wailed our fill, his mother who bore
him to her ill hap, and I myself.”

Thus spake he wailing, and all the men of the city made moan with him.
And among the women of Troy, Hekabe led the wild lament: “My child, ah,
woe is me! wherefore should I live in my pain, now thou art dead, who
night and day wert my boast through the city, and blessing to all, both
men and women of Troy throughout the town, who hailed thee as a god,
for verily an exceeding glory to them wert thou in thy life:—now death
and fate have overtaken thee.”

Thus spake she wailing. But Hector’s wife knew not as yet, for no true
messenger had come to tell her how her husband abode without the gates,
but in an inner chamber of the lofty house she was weaving a double
purple web, and broidering therein manifold flowers. Then she called to
her goodly-haired handmaids through the house to set a great tripod on
the fire, that Hector might have warm washing when he came home out of
the battle fond heart, and was unaware how, far from all washings,
bright-eyed Athene had slain him by the hand of Achilles. But she heard
shrieks and groans from the battlements, and her limbs reeled, and the
shuttle fell from her hands to earth. Then again among her
goodly-haired maids she spake: “Come two of ye this way with me that I
may see what deeds are done. It was the voice of my husband’s noble
mother that I heard, and in my own breast my heart leapeth to my mouth
and my knees are numbed beneath me: surely some evil thing is at hand
against the children of Priam. Would that such word might never reach
my ear! yet terribly I dread lest noble Achilles have cut off bold
Hector from the city by himself and chased him to the plain and ere
this ended his perilous pride that possessed him, for never would he
tarry among the throng of men but ran out before them far, yielding
place to no man in his hardihood.”

Thus saying she sped through the chamber like one mad, with beating
heart, and with her went her handmaidens. But when she came to the
battlements and the throng of men, she stood still upon the wall and
gazed, and beheld him dragged before the city:—swift horses dragged him
recklessly toward the hollow ships of the Achaians. Then dark night
came on her eyes and shrouded her, and she fell backward and gasped
forth her spirit. From off her head she shook the bright attiring
thereof, frontlet and net and woven band, and veil, the veil that
golden Aphrodite gave her on the day when Hector of the glancing helm
led her forth of the house of Eetion, having given bride-gifts untold.
And around her thronged her husband’s sisters and his brothers’ wives,
who held her up among them, distraught even to death. But when at last
she came to herself and her soul returned into her breast, then wailing
with deep sobs she spake among the women of Troy: “O Hector, woe is me!
to one fate then were we both born, thou in Troy in the house of Priam,
and I in Thebe under woody Plakos, in the house of Eetion, who reared
me from a little one—ill-fated sire of cruel-fated child. Ah, would he
have begotten me not. Now thou to the house of Hades beneath the secret
places of the earth departest, and me in bitter mourning thou leavest a
widow in thy halls: and thy son is but an infant child—son of unhappy
parents, thee and me—nor shalt thou profit him, Hector, since thou art
dead, neither he thee. For even if he escape the Achaians’ woful war,
yet shall labour and sorrow cleave unto him hereafter, for other men
shall seize his lands. The day of orphanage sundereth a child from his
fellows, and his head is bowed down ever, and his cheeks are wet with
tears. And in his need the child seeketh his father’s friends, plucking
this one by cloak and that by coat, and one of them that pity him
holdeth his cup a little to his mouth, and moisteneth his lips, but his
palate he moisteneth not. And some child unorphaned thrusteth him from
the feast with blows and taunting words, ‘Out with thee! no father of
thine is at our board.’ Then weeping to his widowed mother shall he
return, even Astyanax, who erst upon his father’s knee ate only marrow
and fat flesh of sheep; and when sleep fell on him and he ceased from
childish play, then in bed in his nurse’s arms he would slumber softly
nested, having satisfied his heart with good things; but now that he
hath lost his father he will suffer many ills, Astyanax—that name the
Trojans gave him, because thou only wet the defence of their gates and
their long walls. But now by the beaked ships, far from thy parents,
shall coiling worms devour thee when the dogs have had their fill, as
thou liest naked; yet in these halls lieth raiment of thine, delicate
and fair, wrought by the hands of women. But verily all these will I
consume with burning fire—to thee no profit, since thou wilt never lie
therein, yet that his be honour to thee from the men and the women of
Troy.”

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan.



BOOK XXIII.

Of the funeral of Patroklos, and the funeral games.


Thus they throughout the city made moan: but the Achaians when they
were come to the ships and to the Hellespont were scattered each to his
own ship: only the Myrmidons Achilles suffered not to be scattered, but
spake among his comrades whose delight was in war: “Fleet-horsed
Myrmidons, my trusty comrades, let us not yet unyoke our whole-hooved
steeds from their cars, but with horses and chariots let us go near and
mourn Patroklos, for such is the honour of the dead. Then when we have
our fill of grievous wailing, we will unyoke the horses and all sup
here.”

He said, and they with one accord made lamentation, and Achilles led
their mourning. So thrice around the dead they drave their well-maned
steeds, moaning; and Thetis stirred among them desire of wailing.
Bedewed were the sands with tears, bedewed the warriors’ arms; so great
a lord of fear they sorrowed for. And Peleus’ son led their loud wail,
laying his man-slaying hands on his comrade’s breast: “All hail,
Patroklos, even in the house of Hades; for all that I promised thee
before am I accomplishing, seeing I have dragged hither Hector to give
raw unto dogs to devour, and twelve noble children of the Trojans to
slaughter before thy pyre, because of mine anger at thy slaying.”

He said, and devised foul entreatment of noble Hector, stretching him
prone in the dust beside the bier of Menoitios’ son. And the rest put
off each his glittering bronze arms, and unyoked their high-neighing
horses, and sate them down numberless beside the ship of fleet-footed
Aiakides, and he gave them ample funeral feast. Many sleek oxen were
stretched out, their throats cut with steel, and many sheep and
bleating goats, and many white-tusked boars well grown in fat were
spitted to singe in the flame of Hephaistos; so on all sides round the
corpse in cupfuls blood was flowing.

But the fleet-footed prince, the son of Peleus, was brought to noble
Agamemnon by the Achaian chiefs, hardly persuading him thereto, for his
heart was wroth for his comrade. And when they were come to Agamemnol’s
hut, forthwith they bade clear-voiced heralds set a great tripod on the
fire, if haply they might persuade the son of Peleus to wash from him
the bloody gore. But he denied them steadfastly, and sware moreover an
oath: “Nay, verily by Zeus, who is highest and best of gods, not lawful
is it that water should come nigh my head or ever I shall have laid
Patroklos on the fire, and heaped a barrow, and shaved my hair, since
never again shall second grief thus reach my heart, while I remain
among the living. Yet now for the present let us yield us to our
mournful meal: but with the morning, O king of men Agamemnon, rouse the
folk to bring wood and furnish all that it beseemeth a dead man to have
when he goeth beneath the misty gloom, to the end that untiring fire
may burn him quickly from sight, and the host betake them to their
work.”

Thus spake he, and they listened readily to him and obeyed, and eagerly
making ready each his meal they supped, and no lack had their soul of
equal feast. But when they had put off from them the desire of meat and
drink, the rest went down each man to his tent to take his rest, but
the son of Peleus upon the beach of the sounding sea lay groaning
heavily, amid the host of Myrmidons, in an open place, where waves were
breaking on the shore. Now when sleep took hold on him, easing the
cares of his heart, deep sleep that fell about him, (for sore tired
were his glorious knees with onset upon Hector toward windy Ilios),
then came there unto him the spirit of hapless Patroklos, in all things
like his living self, in stature, and fair eyes, and voice, and the
raiment of his body was the same; and he stood above Achilles’ head and
spake to him: “Thou sleepest, and hast forgotten me, O Achilles. Not in
my life wast thou ever unmindful of me, but in my death. Bury me with
all speed, that I pass the gates of Hades. Far off the spirits banish
me, the phantoms of men outworn, nor suffer me to mingle with them
beyond the River, but vainly I wander along the wide-gated dwelling of
Hades. Now give me, I pray pitifully of thee, thy hand, for never more
again shall I come back from Hades, when ye have given me my due of
fire. Never among the living shall we sit apart from our dear comrades
and take counsel together, but me hath the harsh fate swallowed up
which was appointed me even from my birth. Yea and thou too thyself,
Achilles peer of gods, beneath the wall of the noble Trojans art doomed
to die. Yet one thing will I say, and charge thee, if haply thou wilt
have regard thereto. Lay not my bones apart from thine, Achilles, but
together, even as we were nurtured in your house, when Menoitios
brought me yet a little one from Opoeis to your country by reason of a
grievous man-slaying, on the day when I slew Amphidamas’ son, not
willing it, in childish wrath over the dice. Then took me the knight
Peleus into his house and reared me kindly and named me thy squire: so
therefore let one coffer hide our bones [a golden coffer, two handled,
thy lady mother’s gift].”

Then made answer unto him Achilles fleet of foot: “Wherefore, O my
brother, hast thou come hither, and chargest me everything that I
should do? Verily I will accomplish all, and have regard unto thy
bidding. But stand more nigh me; for one moment let us throw our arms
around each other, and take our fill of dolorous lament.”

He spake, and reached forth with his hands, but clasped him not; for
like a vapour the spirit was gone beneath the earth with a faint
shriek. And Achilles sprang up marvelling, and smote his hands
together, and spake a word of woe: “Ay me, there remaineth then even in
the house of Hades a spirit and phantom of the dead, albeit the life be
not anywise therein: for all night long hath the spirit of hapless
Patroklos stood over me, wailing and making moan, and charged me
everything that I should do, and wondrous like his living self it
seemed.”

Thus said he, and stirred in all of them yearning to make lament; and
rosy-fingered Morn shone forth on them while they still made moan
around the piteous corpse. Then lord Agamemnon sped mules and men from
all the huts to fetch wood; and a man of valour watched thereover, even
Meriones, squire of kindly Idomeneus. And they went forth with
wood-cutting axes in their hands and well-woven ropes, and before them
went the mules, and uphill and downhill and sideways and across they
went. But when they came to the spurs of many-fountained Ida,
straightway they set them lustily to hew high-foliaged oaks with the
long-edged bronze, and with loud noise fell the trees. Then splitting
them asunder the Achaians bound them behind the mules, and they tore up
the earth with their feet as they made for the plain through the thick
underwood. And all the wood-cutters bare logs; for thus bade Meriones,
squire of kindly Idomeneus. And on the Shore they threw them down in
line, where Achilles purposed a mighty tomb for Patroklos and for
himself.

Then when they had laid down all about great piles of wood, they sate
them down all together and abode. Then straightway Achilles bade the
warlike Myrmidons gird on their arms and each yoke the horses to his
chariot; and they arose and put their armour on, and mounted their
chariots, both fighting men and charioteers. In front were the men in
chariots, and a cloud of footmen followed after, numberless; and in the
midst his comrades bare Patroklos. And they heaped all the corpse with
their hair that they cut off and threw thereon; and behind did goodly
Achilles bear the head, sorrowing; for a noble comrade was he speeding
forth unto the realm of Hades.

And when they came to the place where Achilles had bidden them, they
set down the dead, and piled for him abundant wood. Then fleet-footed
noble Achilles bethought him of one thing more: standing apart from the
pyre he shore off a golden lock, the lock whose growth he nursed to
offer unto the River Spercheios, and sore troubled spake be, looking
forth over the wine-dark sea: “Spercheios, in other wise vowed my
father Peleus unto thee that I returning thither to my native land
should shear my hair for thee and offer a holy hecatomb, and fifty rams
should sacrifice there above thy springs, where is the sacred close and
altar burning spice. So vowed the old man, but thou hast not
accomplished him his desire. And now since I return not to my dear
native land, unto the hero Patroklos I may give this hair to take
away.”

Thus saying he set the hair in the hands of his dear comrade, and
stirred in all of them yearning to make lament. And so would the light
of the sun have gone down on their lamentation, had not Achilles said
quickly to Agamemnon as he stood beside him: “Son of Atreus—for to thy
words most will the host of the Achaians have regard—of lamentation
they may sate them to the full. But now disperse them from the burning
and bid them make ready their meal, and we to whom the dead is dearest
will take pains for these things; yet let the chiefs tarry nigh unto
us.”

Then when Agamemnon king of men heard that, he forthwith dispersed the
host among the trim ships, but the nearest to the dead tarried there
and piled the wood, and made a pyre a hundred feet this way and that,
and on the pyre’s top set the corpse, with anguish at their hearts. And
many lusty sheep and shambling crook-horned oxen they flayed and made
ready before the pyre; and taking from all of them the fat, great
hearted Achilles wrapped the corpse therein from head to foot, and
heaped the flayed bodies round. And he set therein two-handled jars of
honey and oil, leaning them against the bier; and four strong-necked
horses he threw swiftly on the pyre, and groaned aloud. Nine house-dogs
had the dead chief: of them did Achilles slay twain and throw them on
the pyre. And twelve valiant sons of great-hearted Trojans he slew with
the sword—for he devised mischief in his heart and he set to the
merciless might of the fire, to feed thereon. Then moaned he aloud, and
called on his dear comrade by his name: “All hail to thee, O Patroklos,
even in the house of Hades, for all that I promised thee before am I
now accomplishing. Twelve valiant sons of great-hearted Trojans, behold
these all in company with thee the fire devoureth: but Hector son of
Priam will I nowise give to the fire to feed upon, but to dogs.”

Thus spake he threatening, but no dogs might deal with Hector, for day
and night Aphrodite daughter of Zeus kept off the dogs, and anointed
him with rose-sweet oil ambrosial that Achilles might not tear him when
he dragged him. And over him Phoebus Apollo brought a dark cloud from
heaven to earth and covered all that place whereon the dead man lay,
lest meanwhile the sul’s strength shrivel his flesh round about upon
his sinews and limbs.

But the pyre of dead Patroklos kindled not. Then fleet-footed noble
Achilles had a further thought: standing aside from the pyre he prayed
to the two Winds of North and West, and promised them fair offerings,
and pouring large libations from a golden cup besought them to come,
that the corpses might blaze up speedily in the fire, and the wood make
haste to be enkindled. Then Iris, when she heard his prayer, went
swiftly with the message to the Winds. They within the house of the
gusty West Wind were feasting all together at meat, when Iris sped
thither, and halted on the threshold of stone. And when they saw her
with their eyes, they sprang up and called to her every one to sit by
him. But she refused to sit, and spake her word: “No seat for me; I
must go back to the streams of Ocean, to the Ethiopians’ land where
they sacrifice hecatombs to the immortal gods, that I too may feast at
their rites. But Achilles is praying the North Wind and the loud West
to come, and promising them fair offerings, that ye may make the pyre
be kindled whereon lieth Patroklos, for whom all the Achaians are
making moan.”

She having thus said departed, and they arose with a mighty sound,
rolling the clouds before them. And swiftly they came blowing over the
sea, and the wave rose beneath their shrill blast; and they came to
deep-soiled Troy, and fell upon the pile, and loudly roared the mighty
fire. So all night drave they the flame of the pyre together, blowing
shrill; and all night fleet Achilles, holding a two-handled cup, drew
wine from a golden bowl, and poured it forth and drenched the earth,
calling upon the spirit of hapless Patroklos. As a father waileth when
he burneth the bones of his son, new-married, whose death is woe to his
hapless parents, so wailed Achilles as he burnt the bones of his
comrade, going heavily round the burning pile, with many moans.

But at the hour when the Morning star goeth forth to herald light upon
the earth, the star that saffron-mantled Dawn cometh after, and
spreadeth over the salt sea, then grew the burning faint, and the flame
died down. And the Winds went back again to betake them home over the
Thracian main, and it roared with a violent swell. Then the son of
Peleus turned away from the burning and lay down wearied, and sweet
sleep leapt on him. But they who were with Atreus’ son gathered all
together, and the noise and clash of their approach aroused him; and he
sate upright and spake a word to them: “Son of Atreus and ye other
chiefs of the Achaians, first quench with gleaming wine all the burning
so far as the fire’s strength hath reached, and then let us gather up
the bones of Patroklos, Menoitios’ son, singling them well, and easy
are they to discern, for he lay in the middle of the pyre, while the
rest apart at the edge burnt-confusedly, horses and men. And his bones
let us put within a golden urn, and double-folded fat, until that I
myself be hidden in Hades. But no huge barrow I bid you toil to raise—a
seemly one, no more: then afterward do ye Achaians build it broad and
high, whosoever of you after I am gone may be left in the benched
ships.”

Thus spake he, and they hearkened to the fleet-footed son of Peleus.
First quenched they with gleaming wine the burning so far as the flame
went, and the ash had settled deep: then with lamentation they gathered
up the white bones of their gentle comrade into a golden urn and
double-folded fat, and placed the urn in the hut and covered it with a
linen veil. And they marked the circle of the barrow, and set the
foundations thereof around the pyre, and straightway heaped thereon a
heap of earth. Then when they had heaped up the barrow they were for
going back. But Achilles stayed the folk in that place, and made them
sit in wide assembly, and from his ships he brought forth prizes,
caldrons and tripods, and horses and mules and strong oxen, and
fair-girdled women, and grey iron.

First for fleet chariot-racers he ordained a noble prize, a woman
skilled in fair handiwork for the winner to lead home, and an eared
tripod that held two-and-twenty measures; these for the first man; and
for the second he ordained a six-year-old mare unbroke with a mule foal
in her womb; and for the third he gave a goodly caldron yet untouched
by fire, holding four measures, bright as when first made; and for the
fourth he ordained two talents of gold; and for the fifth a two-handled
urn untouched of fire, Then he stood up and spake a word among the
Argives: “Son of Atreus and ye other well-greaved Achaians, for the
chariot-racers these prizes lie awaiting them in the lists. If in some
other’s honour we Achaians were now holding our games, it would be I
who should win the first prize and bear it to my hut; for ye know how
far my pair of horses are first in excellence, for they are immortal
and Poseidon gave them to my father Peleus, and he again to me. But
verily I will abide, I and my whole-hooved horses, so glorious a
charioteer have they lost, and one so kind, who on their manes full
often poured smooth oil, when he had washed them in clear water. For
him they stand and mourn, and their manes are trailing on the ground,
and there stand they with sorrow at their hearts. But ye others
throughout the host get ye to your places, whosoever of the Achalans
hath trust in his horses and firm-jointed car.”

Thus spake the son of Peleus, and the fleet chariot-racers were
gathered. First of all arose up Eumelos king of men, Admetos’ son, a
skilful charioteer; and next to him arose Tydeus’ son, valiant
Diomedes, and yoked his horses of the breed of Tros, which on a time he
seized from Aineias, when Apollo saved their lord. And after him arose
Atreus’ son, fair-haired heaven-sprung Menelaos, and yoked him a swift
pair Aithe, Agamemnol’s mare, and his own horse Podargos. Her unto
Agamemnon did Anchises’ son Echepolos give in fee, that he might escape
from following him to windy Ilios and take his pleasure at home; for
great wealth had Zeus given him, and he dwelt in Sikyon of spacious
lawns:— so Menelaos yoked her, and she longed exceedingly for the race.
And fourth, Antilochos made ready his fair-maned horses, even the noble
son of Nestor, high-hearted king, who was the son of Neleus; and fleet
horses bred at Pylos drew his car. And his father standing by his side
spake counselling him to his profit, though himself was well advised:
“Antilochos, verily albeit thou art young, Zeus and Poseidon have loved
thee and taught thee all skill with horses; wherefore to teach thee is
no great need, for thou well knowest how to wheel round the post; yet
are thy horses very slow in the race: therefore methinks there will be
sad work for thee. For the horses of the others are fleeter, yet the
men know not more cunning than thou hast. So come, dear son, store thy
mind with all manner of cunning, that the prize escape thee not. By
cunning is a woodman far better than by force; by cunning doth a
helmsman on the wine-dark deep steer his swift ship buffeted by winds;
by cunning hath charioteer the better of charioteer. For whoso trusting
in his horses and car alone wheeleth heedlessly and wide at either end,
his horses swerve on the course, and he keepeth them not in hand. But
whoso is of crafty mind, though he drive worse horses, he ever keeping
his eye upon the post turneth closely by it, neither is unaware how far
at first to force his horses by the ox-hide reins, but holdeth them
safe in hand and watcheth the leader in the race. Now will I tell thee
a certain sign, and it shall not escape thee. A fathom’s height above
the ground standeth a withered stump, whether of oak or pine: it
decayeth not in the rain, and two white stones on either side thereof
are fixed at the joining of the track, and all round it is smooth
driving ground. Whether it be a monument of some man dead long ago, or
have been made their goal in the race by ancient men, this now is the
mark fixed by fleet-footed Achilles. Wherefore do thou drive close and
bear thy horses and chariot hard thereon, and lean thy body on the
well-knit car slightly to their left, and call upon the off-horse with
voice and lash, and give him rein from thy hand. But let the near horse
hug the post so that the nave of the well-wrought wheel seem to graze
it—yet beware of touching the stone, lest thou wound the horses and
break the chariot; so would that be triumph to the rest and reproach
unto thyself. But, dear son, be wise and on thy guard; for if at the
turning-post thou drive past the rest, there is none shall overtake
thee from behind or pass thee by, not though he drave the goodly Arion
in pursuit, the fleet horse of Adrastos, of divine descent, or the
horses of Laomedon, best of all bred in this land.”

Thus spake Neleian Nestor and sate him down again in his place, when he
had told his son the sum of every matter.

And Meriones was the fifth to make ready his sleek-coated steeds. Then
went they up into their chariots, and cast in the lots: and Achilles
shook them, and forth leapt the lot of Antilochos Nestor’s son, and the
next lot had lord Eumelos, and next to him the son of Atreus,
spear-famed Menelaos, and next to him drew Meriones his place; then
lastly Tydeides, far the best of all, drew his lot for his chariot’s
place. Then they stood side by side, and Achilles showed to them the
turning post, far off in the smooth plain; and beside it he placed an
umpire, godlike Phoinix, his father’s follower, that he might note the
running and tell the truth thereof.

Then all together lifted the lash above their steeds, and smote them
with the reins, and called on them eagerly with words: and they
forthwith sped swiftly over the plain, leaving the ships behind; and
beneath their breasts stood the rising dust like a cloud or whirlwind,
and their manes waved on the blowing wind. And the chariots ran
sometimes on the bounteous earth, and other whiles would bound into the
air. And the drivers stood in the cars, and the heart of every man beat
in desire of victory, and they called every man to his horses, that
flew amid their dust across the plain.

But when the fleet horses were now running the last part of the course,
back toward the grey sea, then was manifest the prowess of each, and
the horses strained in the race; and presently to the front rushed the
fleet mares of Pheres’ grandson, and next to them Diomedes’ stallions
of the breed of Tros, not far apart, but hard anigh, for they seemed
ever as they would mount Eumelos’ car, and with their breath his back
was warm and his broad shoulders, for they bent their heads upon him as
they flew along. Thus would Tydeus’ son have either outstripped the
other or made it a dead heat, had not Phoebus Apollo been wroth with
him and smitten from his hand the shining lash. Then from his eyes ran
tears of anger, for that he saw the mares still at speed, even
swiftlier than before, while his own horses were thrown out, as running
without spur. But Athene was not unaware of Apollo’s guile against
Tydeides, and presently sped after the shepherd of hosts, and gave him
back the lash, and put spirit into his steeds. Then in wrath after the
son of Admetos was the goddess gone, and brake his steeds’ yoke, and
the mares ran sideways off the course, and the pole was twisted to the
ground. And Eumelos was hurled out of the car beside the wheel, and his
elbows and mouth and nose were flayed, and his forehead bruised above
his eyebrows; and his eyes filled with tears and his lusty voice was
choked. Then Tydeides held his whole-hooved horses on one side, darting
far out before the rest, for Athene put spirit into his steeds and shed
glory on himself. Now next after him came golden-haired Menelaos
Atreus’ son. But Antilochos called to his father’s horses: “Go ye too
in, strain to your fleetest pace. Truly I nowise bid you strive with
those, the horses of wise Tydeides, unto which Athene hath now given
speed, and shed glory on their charioteer. But overtake Atreides’
horses with all haste, and be not outstripped by them, lest Aithe that
is but a mare pour scorn on you. Why are ye outstripped, brave steeds?
Thus will I tell you, and verily it shall be brought to pass—ye will
find no tendance with Nestor shepherd of hosts, but straightway he will
slay you with the edge of the sword if through heedlessness we win but
the worse prize. Have after them at your utmost speed, and I for my
part will devise a plan to pass them in the strait part of the course,
and this shall fail me not.”

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince ran swiftlier
some little while; and presently did the good warrior Antilochos espy a
strait place in a sunk part of the way. There was a rift in the earth,
where torrent water gathered and brake part of the track away, and
hollowed all the place; there drave Menelaos, shunning the encounter of
the wheels. But Antilochos turned his whole-hooved horses out of the
track, and followed him a little at one side. And the son of Atreus
took alarm and shouted to Antilochos: “Antilochos, thou art driving
recklessly—hold in thy horses! The road is straitened, soon thou mayest
pass me in a wider place, lest thou foul my chariot and undo us both.”

Thus spake he, but Antilochos drave even fiercelier than before, plying
his lash, as though he heard him not. As far as is the range of a disk
swung from the shoulder when a young man hurleth it, making trial of
his force, even so far ran they on; then the mares of Atreus’ son gave
back, for he ceased of himself to urge them on, lest the whole-hooved
steeds should encounter on the track, and overset the well-knit cars,
and the drivers fall in the dust in their zeal for victory. So
upbraiding Antilochos spake golden-haired Menelaos: “Antilochos, no
mortal man is more malicious than thou. Go thy mad way, since falsely
have we Achaians called thee wise. Yet even so thou shalt not bear off
the prize unchallenged to an oath.”

Thus saying he called aloud to his horses: “Hold ye not back nor stand
still with sorrow at heart. Their feet and knees will grow weary before
yours, for they both lack youth.”

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince sped faster on,
and were quickly close upon the others.

Now the Argives sitting in concourse were gazing at the horses, and
they came flying amid their dust over the plain. And the first aware of
them was Idomeneus, chief of the Cretans, for he was sitting outside
the concourse in the highest place of view, and when he heard the voice
of one that shouted, though afar off, he knew it; and he was aware of a
horse showing plainly in the front, a chestnut all the rest of him, but
in the forehead marked with a white star round like the moon. And he
stood upright and spoke among the Argives: “Friends, chiefs, and
counsellors of the Argives, is it I alone who see the horses, or do ye
also? A new pair seem to me now to be in front, and a new charioteer
appeareth; the mares which led in the outward course must have been
thrown out there in the plain. For I saw them turning first the hither
post, but now can see them nowhere, though my eyes are gazing
everywhere along the Trojan plain. Did the reins escape the charioteer
so that he could not drive aright round the post and failed in the
turn? There, methinks, must he have been cast forth, and have broken
his chariot, and the mares must have left the course, in the wildness
of their heart. But stand up ye too and look, for myself I discern not
certainly, but the first man seemeth to me one of Aitolian race, and he
ruleth among Argives, the son of horse-taming Tydeus, stalwart
Diomedes.”

Then fleet Aias Oileus’ son rebuked him in unseemly sort: “Idomeneus,
why art thou a braggart of old? As yet far off the high-stepping mares
are coursing over the wide plain. Neither art thou so far the youngest
among the Argives, nor do thy eyes look so far the keenliest from thy
head, yet continually braggest thou. It beseemeth thee not to be a
braggart, for there are here better men. And the mares leading are they
that led before, Eumelos’ mares, and he standeth and holdeth the reins
within the car.”

Then wrathfully in answer spake the chief of Cretans: “Aias, master of
railing, ill-counselled, in all else art thou behind other Argives, for
thy mind is unfriendly. Come then let us wager a tripod or caldron, and
make Agamemnon Atreus’ son our umpire, which mares are leading, that
thou mayest pay and learn.”

Thus said he, and straightway fleet Aias Oileus’ son arose angrily to
answer with harsh words: and strife between the twain would have gone
further, had not Achilles himself stood up and spake a word: “No longer
answer each other with harsh words, Aias and Idomeneus, ill words, for
it beseemeth not. Surely ye are displeased with any other who should do
thus. Sit ye in the concourse and keep your eyes upon the horses; soon
they in zeal for victory will come hither, and then shall ye know each
of you the Argives’ horses, which follow, and which lead.”

He said, and the son of Tydeus came driving up, and with his lash smote
now and again from the shoulder, and his horses were stepping high as
they sped swiftly on their way. And sprinklings of dust smote ever the
charioteer, and his chariot overlaid with gold and tin ran behind his
fleet-footed steeds, and small trace was there of the wheel-tires
behind in the fine dust, as they flew speeding on. Then he drew up in
the mid concourse, and much sweat poured from the horses’ heads and
chests to the ground. And Diomedes leapt to earth from the shining car,
and leant his lash against the yoke. Then stalwart Sthenelos tarried
not, but promptly took the prize, and gave to his proud comrades the
woman to lead and the eared tripod to bear away, and he loosed the
horses from the yoke.

And next after him drave Neleian Antilochos his horses, by craft, not
swiftness, having passed by Menelaos; yet even now Menelaos held his
swift steeds hard anigh. As far as a horse is from the wheel, which
draweth his master, straining with the car over the plain—his hindmost
tail-hairs touch the tire, for the wheel runneth hard anigh nor is much
space between, as he speedeth far over the plain—by so much was
Menelaos behind high-born Antilochos, howbeit at first he was a whole
disk-cast behind, but quickly he was catching Antilochos up, for the
high mettle of Agamemnol’s mare, sleek-coated Aithe, was rising in her.
And if yet further both had had to run he would have passed his rival
nor left it even a dead heat. But Meriones, stout squire of Idomeneus,
came in a spear-throw behind famous Menelaos, for tardiest of all were
his sleek-coated horses, and slowest he himself to drive a chariot in
the race. Last of them all came Admetos’ son, dragging his goodly car
driving his steeds in front. Him when fleet-footed noble Achilles
beheld he pitied him, and he stood up and spake winged words among the
Argives: “Last driveth his whole-hooved horses the best man of them
all. But come let us give him a prize, as is seemly, prize for the
second place, but the first let the son of Tydeus take.”

Thus spake he, and all applauded that he bade. And he would have given
him the mare, for the Achaians applauded, had not Antilochos, son of
great-hearted Nestor; risen up and answered Peleian Achilles on behalf
of his right: “O Achilles, I shall be sore angered with thee if thou
accomplish this word, for thou art minded to take away my prize,
because thou thinkest of how his chariot and fleet steeds miscarried,
and himself withal, good man though he be. Nay, it behoved him to pray
to the Immortals, then would he not have come in last of all in the
race. But if thou pitiest him and he be dear to thy heart, there is
much gold in thy hut, bronze is there and sheep, hand-maids are there
and whole-hooved horses. Thereof take thou and give unto him afterward
even a richer prize, or even now at once, that the Achaians may applaud
thee. But the mare I will not yield; for her let what man will essay
the battle at my hands.”

Thus spake he, and fleet-footed noble Achilles smiled, pleased with
Antilochos, for he was his dear comrade; and spake in answer to him
winged words: “Antilochos, if thou wouldst have me give Eumelos some
other thing beside from out my house, that also will I do. I will give
unto him a breast-plate that I took from Asteropaios, of bronze,
whereon a casting of bright tin is overlaid, and of great worth will it
be to him.” He said, and bade his dear comrade Automedon bring it from
the hut, and he went and brought it. [Then he placed it in Eumelos’
hands, and he received it gladly.]

But Menelaos also arose among them, sore at heart, angered exceedingly
against Antilochos; and the herald set the staff in his hand, and
called for silence among the Argives; then spake among them that
godlike man: “Antilochos, who once wert wise, what thing is this thou
hast done? Thou hast shamed my skill and made my horses fail, thrusting
thine own in front that are far worse. Come now, ye chiefs and
counsellors of the Argives, give judgment between us both, and favour
neither: lest some one of the mail-clad Achalans say at any time: ‘By
constraining Antilochos through false words hath Menelaos gone off with
the mare, for his horses were far worse, howbeit he hath advantage in
rank and power.’ Nay, I myself will bring the issue about, and I deem
that none other of the Danaans shall reproach me, for the trial shall
be just. Antilochos, fosterling of Zeus, come thou hither and as it is
ordained stand up before thy horses and chariot and take in thy hand
the pliant lash wherewith thou dravest erst, and touching thy horses
swear by the Enfolder and Shaker of the earth that not wilfully didst
thou hinder my chariot by guile.”

Then answered him wise Antilochos: “Bear with me now, for far younger
am I than thou, king Menelaos, and thou art before me and my better.
Thou knowest how a young mal’s transgressions come about, for his mind
is hastier and his counsel shallow. So let thy heart suffer me, and I
will of myself give to thee the mare I have taken. Yea, if thou
shouldst ask some other greater thing from my house, I were fain to
give it thee straightway, rather than fall for ever from my place in
thy heart, O fosterling of Zeus, and become a sinner against the gods.”

Thus spake great-hearted Nestor’s son, and brought the mare and put her
in the hand of Menelaos. And his heart was gladdened as when the dew
cometh upon the ears of ripening harvest-corn, what time the fields are
bristling. So gladdened was thy soul, Menelaos, within thy heart. And
he spake unto Antilochos and uttered winged words: “Antilochos, now
will I of myself put away mine anger against thee, since no wise
formerly wert thou flighty or light-minded, howbeit now thy reason was
overcome of youthfulness. Another time be loth to outwit better men.
Not easily should another of the Achaians have persuaded me, but thou
hast suffered and toiled greatly, and thy brave father and brother, for
my sake: therefore will I hearken to thy prayer, and will even give
unto thee the mare, though she is mine, that these also may know that
my heart was never overweening or implacable.”

He said, and gave the mare to Noemon Antilochos’ comrade to lead away,
and then took the shining caldron. And Meriones took up the two talents
of gold in the fourth place, as he had come in. So the fifth prize was
left unclaimed, a two-handled cup; to Nester gave Achilles this,
bearing it to him through the concourse of Argives, and stood by him
and said: “Lo now for thee too, old man, be this a treasure, a memorial
of Patroklos’ burying; for no more shalt thou behold him among the
Argives. Now give I thee this prize unwon, for not in boxing shalt thou
strive, neither wrestle, nor enter on the javelin match, nor race with
thy feet; for grim old age already weigheth on thee.”

Thus saying he placed it in his hand, and Nestor received it gladly,
and spake unto him winged words: “Ay, truly all this, my son, thou hast
meetly said; for no longer are my limbs, friend, firm, nor my feet, nor
do my arms at all swing lightly from my shoulders either side. Would
that my youth were such and my force so firm as when the Epeians were
burying lord Amarynkes at Buprasion, and his sons held the king’s
funeral games. Then was no man found like me, neither of the Epeians
nor of the Pylians themselves or the great-hearted Aitolians. In boxing
I overcame Klytomedes, son of Enops, and in wrestling Ankaios of
Pleuron, who stood up against me, and in the foot-race I outran
Iphiklos, a right good man, and with the spear outthrew Phyleus and
Polydoros; only in the chariot-race the two sons of Aktor beat me [by
crowding their horses in front of me, jealous for victory, because the
chief prizes were left at home.] Now they were twins—one ever held the
reins, the reins he ever held, the other called on the horses with the
lash. Thus was I once, but now let younger men join in such feats; I
must bend to grievous age, but then was I of mark among heroes. But
come hold funeral for thy comrade too with with games. This gift do I
accept with gladness, and my heart rejoiceth that thou rememberest ever
my friendship to thee—(nor forget I thee)—and the honour wherewith it
is meet that I be honoured among the Achaians. And may the gods for
this grant thee due grace.”

Thus spake he, and Peleides was gone down the full concourse of
Achaians, when he had hearkened to all the thanks of Neleus’ son. Then
he ordained prizes of the violent boxing match; a sturdy mule he led
forth and tethered amid the assembly, a six-year mule unbroken, hardest
of all to break; and for the loser set a two-handled cup. Then he stood
up and spake a word among the Argives: “Son of Atreus and ye other
well-greaved Achaians, for these rewards we summon two men of the best
to lift up their hands to box amain. He to whom Apollo shall grant
endurance to the end, and all the Achaians acknowledge it, let him take
the sturdy mule and return with her to his hut; and the loser shall
take with him the two-handled-cup.”

Thus spake he, and forthwith arose a man great and valiant and skilled
in boxing, Epeios son of Panopeus, and laid his hand on the sturdy mule
and said aloud: “Let one come nigh to bear off the two-handled cup; the
mule I say none other of the Achaians shall take for victory with his
fists, for I claim to be the best man here. Sufficeth it not that I
fall short of you in battle? Not possible is it that in all arts a man
be skilled. Thus proclaim I, and it shall be accomplished: I will
utterly bruise mine adversary’s flesh and break his bones, so let his
friends abide together here to bear him forth when vanquished by my
hands.”

Thus spake he, and they all kept deep silence. And alone arose against
him Euryalos, a godlike man, son of king Mekisteus the son of Talaos,
Mekisteus, who came on a time to Thebes when Oedipus had fallen, to his
burial, and there he overcame all the sons of Kadmos. Thus Tydeides
famous with the spear made ready Euryalos for the fight, cheering him
with speech, and greatly desired for him victory. And first he cast
about him a girdle, and next gave him well-cut thongs of the hide of an
ox of the field. And the two boxers being girt went into the midst of
the ring, and both lifting up their stalwart hands fell to, and their
hands joined battle grievously. Then was there terrible grinding of
teeth, and sweat flowed from all their limbs. And noble Epeios came on,
and as the other spied for an opening, smote him on the cheek, nor
could he much more stand, for his limbs failed straightway under him.
And as when beneath the North Wind’s ripple a fish leapeth on a
tangle-covered beach, and then the black wave hideth it, so leapt up
Euryalos at that blow. But great-hearted Epeios took him in his hands
and set him upright, and his dear comrades stood around him, and led
him through the ring with trailing feet, spitting out clotted blood,
drooping his head awry, and they set him down in his swoon among them
and themselves went forth and fetched the two-handled cup.

Then Peleus’ son ordained straightway the prizes for a third contest,
offering them to the Danaans, for the grievous wrestling match: for the
winner a great tripod for standing on the fire, prized by the Achaians
among them at twelve oxens’ worth; and for the loser he brought a woman
into the midst, skilled in manifold work, and they prized her at four
oxen. And he stood up and spake a word among the Argives: “Rise, ye who
will essay this match.”

Thus said he, and there arose great Aias son of Telamon, and Odysseus
of many wiles stood up, the crafty-minded. And the twain being girt
went into the midst of the ring, and clasped each the other in his arms
with stalwart hands, like gable rafters of a lofty house which some
famed craftsman joineth, that he may baffle the wind’s force. And their
backs creaked, gripped firmly under the vigorous hands, and sweat ran
down in streams, and frequent weals along their ribs and shoulders
sprang up, red with blood, while ever they strove amain for victory, to
win the wrought tripod. Neither could Odysseus trip Aias and bear him
to the ground, nor Aias him, for Odysseus’ strength withheld him. But
when they began to irk the well-greaved Achaians, then said to Odysseus
great Aias, Telamol’s son: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of
many wiles, or lift thou me, or I will thee, and the issue shall be
with Zeus.”

Having thus said he lifted him, but Odysseus was not unmindful of his
craft. He smote deftly from behind the hollow of Aias’ knee, and loosed
his limbs, and threw him down backward, and Odysseus fell upon his
chest, and the folk gazed and marvelled. Then in his turn much-enduring
noble Odysseus tried to lift, and moved him a little from the ground,
but lifted him not, so he crooked his knee within the other’s, and both
fell on the ground nigh to each other, and were soiled with dust, And
now starting up again a third time would they have wrestled, had not
Achilles himself arisen and held them back: “No longer press each the
other, nor wear you out with pain. Victory is with both; take equal
prizes and depart, that other Achaians may contend.”

Thus spake he, and they were fain to hear and to obey, and wiped the
dust from them and put their doublets on.

Then straightway the son of Peleus set forth other prizes for fleetness
of foot; a mixing-bowl of silver, chased; six measures it held, and in
beauty it was far the best in all the earth, for artificers of Sidon
wrought it cunningly, and men of the Phoenicians brought it over the
misty sea, and landed it in harbour, and gave it a gift to Thoas; and
Euneos son of Jason gave it to the hero Patroklos a ransom for Lykaon
Priam’s son. Now this cup did Achilles set forth as a prize in honour
of his friend, for whoso should be fleetest in speed of foot. For the
second he set an ox great and very fat, and for the last prize half a
talent of gold. And he stood up and spake a word among the Argives:
“Rise, ye who will essay this match.”

Thus spake he, and straightway arose fleet Aias Oileus’ son, and
Odysseus of many wiles, and after them Nestor’s son Antilochos, for he
was best of all the youth in the foot-race. Then they stood side by
side, and Achilles showed to them the goal. Right eager was the running
from the start, but Oileus’ son forthwith shot to the front, and close
behind him came noble Odysseus, as close as is a weaving-rod to a
fair-girdled womal’s breast when she pulleth it deftly with her hands,
drawing the spool along the warp, and holdeth the rod nigh her breast—
so close ran Odysseus behind Aias and trod in his footsteps or ever the
dust had settled there, and on his head fell the breath of noble
Odysseus as he ran ever lightly on, and all the Achaians applauded his
struggle for the victory and called on him as he laboured hard. But
when they were running the last part of the course, forthwith Odysseus
prayed in his soul to bright-eyed Athene: “Hearken, goddess, come thou
a good helper of my feet.”

Thus prayed he, and Pallas Athene hearkened to him, and made his limbs
feel light, both feet and hands. But when they, were now nigh darting
on the prize, then Aias slipped as he ran, for Athene marred his race,
where filth was strewn from the slaughter of loud-bellowing oxen that
fleet Achilles slew in honour of Patroklos: and Aias’ mouth and
nostrils were filled with that filth of oxen. So much-enduring noble
Odysseus, as he came in first, took up the mixing-bowl, and famous Aias
took the ox. And he stood holding in his hand the horn of the ox of the
field, sputtering away the filth, and spake among the Argives: “Out on
it, it was the goddess who marred my running, she who from of old like
a mother standeth by Odysseus’ side and helpeth him.”

So spake he, but they all laughed pleasantly to behold him. Then
Antilochos smiling bore off the last prize, and spake his word among
the Argives: “Friends, ye will all bear me witness when I say that even
herein also the immortals favour elder men. For Aias is a little older
than I, but Odysseus of an earlier generation and earlier race of men.
A green old age is his, they say, and hard were it for any Achaian to
rival him in speed, save only Achilles.”

Thus spake he, and gave honour to the fleet son of Peleus. And Achilles
answered him and said: “Antilochos, not unheeded shall thy praise be
given; a half-talent of gold I will give thee over and above.” He said,
and set it in his hands, and Antilochos received it gladly.

Then Peleus’ son brought and set in the ring a far-shadowing spear and
a chaldron that knew not the fire, an ox’s worth, embossed with
flowers; and men that were casters of the javelin arose up. There rose
Atreus’ son wide-ruling Agamemnon, and Meriones, Idomeneus’ brave
squire. And swift-footed noble Achilles spake among them: “Son of
Atreus, for that we know how far thou excellest all, and how far the
first thou art in the might of thy throw, take thou this prize with
thee to the hollow ships, and to the hero Meriones let us give the
spear, if thou art willing in thy heart: thus I at least advise.”

Thus spake he, nor disregarded him Agamemnon king of men. So to
Meriones he gave the spear of bronze, but to the herald Talthybios the
hero gave the goodliest prize.



BOOK XXIV.

How the body of Hector was ransomed, and of his funeral.


Then the assembly was broken up, and the tribes were scattered to
betake them each to their own swift ships. The rest bethought them of
supper and sweet sleep to have joy thereof; but Achilles wept,
remembering his dear comrade, nor did sleep that conquereth all take
hold on him, but he kept turning him to this side and to that, yearning
for Patroklos’ manhood and excellent valour, and all the toils he
achieved with him and the woes he bare, cleaving the battles of men and
the grievous waves. As he thought thereon be shed big tears, now lying
on his side, now on his back, now on his face; and then anon he would
arise upon his feet and roam wildly beside the beach of the salt sea.
Nor would he be unaware of the Dawn when she arose over the sea and
shores. But when he had yoked the swift steeds to his car he would bind
Hector behind his chariot to drag him withal; and having thrice drawn
him round the barrow of the dead son of Menoitios he rested again in
his hut, and left Hector lying stretched on his face in the dust. But
Apollo kept away all defacement from his flesh, for he had pity on him
even in death, and covered him all with his golden aegis, that Achilles
might not tear him when he dragged him.

Thus Achilles in his anger entreated noble Hector shamefully; but the
blessed gods when they beheld him pitied him, and urged the
clear-sighted slayer of Argus to steal the corpse away. So to all the
others seemed it good, yet not to Hera or Poseidon or the bright-eyed
Maiden, but they continued as when at the beginning sacred Ilios became
hateful to them, and Priam and his people, by reason of the sin of
Alexandros in that he contemned those goddesses when they came to his
steading, and preferred her who brought him deadly lustfulness. But
when the twelfth morn from that day arose, then spake among the
Immortals Phoebus Apollo: “Hard of heart are ye, O gods, and cruel Hath
Hector never burnt for you thigh-bones of unblemished bulls and goats?
Now have ye not taken heart to rescue even his corpse for his wife to
look upon and his mother and his child and his father Priam and his
people, who speedily would burn him in the fire and make his funeral.
But fell Achilles, O gods, ye are fain to abet, whose mind is nowise
just nor the purpose in his breast to be turned away, but he is cruelly
minded as a lion that in great strength and at the bidding of his proud
heart goeth forth against mel’s flocks to make his meal; even thus
Achilles hath cast out pity, neither hath he shame, that doth both harm
and profit men greatly. It must be that many a man lose even some
dearer one than was this, a brother of the same womb born or perchance
a son; yet bringeth he his wailing and lamentation to an end, for an
enduring soul have the Fates given unto men. But Achilles after
bereaving noble Hector of his life bindeth him behind his horses and
draggeth him around the tomb of his dear comrade: not, verily, is that
more honourable or better for him. Let him take heed lest we wax wroth
with him, good man though he be, for in his fury he is entreating
shamefully the senseless clay.”

Then in anger spake unto him white-armed Hera: “Even thus mightest thou
speak, O Lord of the silver bow, if ye are to give equal honour to
Achilles and to Hector. Hector is but a mortal and was suckled at a
womal’s breast, but Achilles is child of a goddess whom I myself bred
up and reared and gave to a man to be his wife, even to Peleus who was
dearest of all men to the Immortals’ heart. And all ye gods came to her
bridal, and thou among them wert feasting with thy lyre, O lover of ill
company, faithless ever.”

Then to her in answer spake Zeus who gathereth the clouds: “Hera, be
not wroth utterly with the gods: for these mel’s honour is not to be
the same, yet Hector also was dearest to the gods of all mortals that
are in Ilios. So was he to me at least, for nowise failed he in the
gifts I loved. Never did my altar lack seemly feast, drink-offering and
the steam of sacrifice, even the honour that falleth to our due. But
verily we will say no more of stealing away brave Hector, for it cannot
be hidden from Achilles, for his mother abideth ever nigh to him night
and day. But I were fain that some one of the gods would call Thetis to
come near to me, that I may speak unto her a wise word, so that
Achilles may take gifts from Priam and give Hector back.” Thus spake
he, and airy-footed Iris sped forth upon the errand and between
Samothrace and rocky Imbros leapt into the black sea, and the waters
closed above her with a noise. And she sped to the bottom like a weight
of lead that mounted on horn of a field-ox goeth down bearing death to
ravenous fishes. And she found Thetis in a hollow cave; about her sat
gathered other goddesses of the seas and she in their midst was wailing
for the fate of her noble son who must perish in deep-soiled Troy, far
from his native land. And standing near, fleet-footed Iris spake to
her: “Rise, Thetis; Zeus of immortal counsels calleth thee.”

And to her made answer Thetis the silver-footed goddess: “Wherefore
biddeth me that mighty god? I shrink from mingling among the Immortals,
for I have countless woes at heart. Yet go I, nor shall his word be in
vain, whatsoever he saith.”

Thus having said the noble goddess took to her a dark-hued robe, no
blacker raiment was there found than that. Then she went forth, and
wind-footed swift Iris led the way before her, and around them the
surge of the sea was sundered. And when they had come forth upon the
shore they sped up to heaven, and found the far-seeing son of Kronos,
and round him sat gathered all the other blessed gods that are for
ever. Then she sat down beside father Zeus, and Athene gave her place.
And Hera set a fair golden cup in her hand and cheered her with words,
and Thetis drank, and gave back the cup. Then began speech to them the
father of gods and men: “Thou art come to Olympus, divine Thetis, in
thy sorrow, with violent grief at thy heart; I know it of myself.
Nevertheless will I tell thee wherefore I called thee hither. Nine days
hath dispute arisen among the Immortals concerning the corpse of Hector
and Achilles waster of cities. Fain are they to send clear-sighted
Hermes to steal the body away, but now hear what glory I accord herein
to Achilles, that I may keep through times to come thy honour and good
will. Go with all speed to the host and bear to thy son my bidding. Say
to him that the gods are displeased at him, and that I above all
Immortals am wroth, because with furious heart be holdeth Hector at the
beaked ships and hath not given him back, if haply he may fear me and
give Hector back. But I will send Iris to great-hearted Priam to bid
him go to the ships of the Achaians to ransom his dear son, and carry
gifts to Achilles that may gladden his heart.”

Thus spake he, and Thetis the silver-footed goddess was not disobedient
to his word, and sped darting upon her way down from the peaks of
Olympus. And she came to her sol’s hut; there found she him making
grievous moan, and his dear comrades round were swiftly making ready
and furnishing their early meal, and a sheep great and fleecy was being
sacrificed in the hut. Then his lady-mother sate her down close beside
him, and stroked him with her hand and spake to him by his name: “My
child, how long with lamentation and woe wilt thou devour thine heart,
taking thought of neither food nor rest? good were even a womal’s
embrace, for not long shalt thou be left alive to me; already death and
forceful fate are standing nigh thee. But hearken forthwith unto me,
for I am the messenger of Zeus to thee. He saith that the gods are
displeased at thee, and that himself above all Immortals is wroth,
because with furious heart thou holdest Hector at the beaked ships and
hast not given him back. But come restore him, and take ransom for the
dead.”

Then to her in answer spake fleet-footed Achilles: “So be it: whoso
bringeth ransom let him take back the dead, if verily with heart’s
intent the Olympian biddeth it himself.”

So they in the assembly of the ships, mother and son, spake to each
other many winged words. But the son of Kronos thus bade Iris go to
holy Ilios: “Go forth, fleet Iris, leave the abode of Olympus and bear
my message within Ilios to great-hearted Priam that he go to the ships
of the Achaians and ransom his dear son and carry gifts to Achilles
that may gladden his heart; let him go alone, and no other man of the
Trojans go with him. Only let some elder herald attend on him to guide
the mules and smooth-wheeled waggon and carry back to the city the dead
man whom noble Achilles slew. Let not death be in his thought nor any
fear; such guide will we give unto him, even the slyer of Argus who
shall lead him until his leading bring him to Achilles. And when he
shall have led him within the hut, neither shall Achilles himself slay
him nor suffer any other herein, for not senseless is he or
unforeseeing or wicked, but with all courtesy he will spare a suppliant
man.”

Thus spake he, and airy-footed Iris sped forth upon the errand. And she
came to the house of Priam, and found therein crying and moan. His
children sitting around their father within the court were bedewing
their raiment with their tears, and the old man in their midst was
close wrapped all over in his cloak; and on his head and neck was much
mire that he had gathered in his hands as he grovelled upon the earth.
And his daughters and his sons’ wives were wailing throughout the
house, bethinking them of all those valiant men who had lost their
lives at the hands of the Argives and were lying low. And the messenger
of Zeus stood beside Priam and spake softly unto him, and trembling
came upon his limbs: “Be of good cheer in thy heart, O Priam son of
Dardanos, and be not dismayed for anything, for no evil come I hither
to forebode to thee, but with good will. I am the messenger of Zeus to
thee, who, though he be afar off, hath great care and pity for thee.
The Olympian biddeth thee ransom noble Hector and carry gifts to
Achilles that may gladden his heart: go thou alone, let none other of
the Trojans go with thee. Only let some elder herald attend on thee to
guide the mules and the smooth-wheeled waggon to carry back to the city
the dead man whom noble Achilles slew. Let not death be in thy thought,
nor any fear; such guide shall go with thee, even the slayer of Argus,
who shall lead thee until his leading bring thee to Achilles. And when
he shall have led thee into the hut, neither shall Achilles himself
slay thee, nor suffer any other herein, for not senseless is he or
unforeseeing or wicked, but with all courtesy he will spare a suppliant
man.”

Thus having spoken fleet Iris departed from him; and he bade his sons
make ready the smooth-wheeled mule waggon, and bind the wicker carriage
thereon. And himself he went down to his fragrant chamber, of cedar
wood, high-roofed, that held full many jewels: and to Hekabe his wife
he called and spake: “Lady, from Zeus hath an Olympian messenger come
to me, that I go to the ships of the Achaians and ransom my dear son,
and carry gifts to Achilles that may gladden his heart. Come tell me
how seemeth it to thy mind, for of myself at least my desire and heart
bid me mightily to go thither to the ships and enter the wide camp of
the Achaians.”

Thus spake he, but his wife lamented aloud and made answer to him: “Woe
is me, whither is gone thy mind whereby aforetime thou wert famous
among stranger men and among them thou rulest? How art thou fain to go
alone to the ships of the Achaians, to meet the eyes of the man who
hath slain full many of thy brave sons? of iron verily is thy heart.
For if he light on thee and behold thee with his eyes, a savage and
ill-trusted man is this, and he will not pity thee, neither reverence
thee at all. Nay, now let us sit in the hall and make lament afar off.
Even thus did forceful Fate erst spin for Hector with her thread at his
beginning when I bare him, even I, that he should glut fleet-footed
dogs, far from his parents, in the dwelling of a violent man whose
inmost vitals I were fain to fasten and feed upon; then would his deeds
against my son be paid again to him, for not playing the coward was he
slain of him, but championing the men and deep-bosomed women of Troy,
neither bethought he him of shelter or of flight.”

The to her in answer spake the old man godlike Priam: “Stay me not, for
I am fain to go, neither be thyself a bird of ill boding in my halls,
for thou wilt not change my mind. Were it some other and a child of
earth that bade me this, whether some seer or of the priests that
divine from sacrifice, then would we declare it false and have no part
therein; but now, since I have heard the voice of the goddess myself
and looked upon her face, I will go forth, and her word shall not be
void. And if it be my fate to die by the ships of the mail-clad
Achaians, so would I have it; let Achilles slay me with all speed, when
once I have taken in my arms my son, and have satisfied my desire with
moan.”

He spake, and opened fair lids of chests wherefrom he chose twelve very
goodly womel’s robes and twelve cloaks of single fold and of coverlets
a like number and of fair sheets, and of doublets thereupon. And he
weighed and brought forth talents of gold ten in all, and two shining
tripods and four caldrons, and a goblet exceeding fair that men of
Thrace had given him when he went thither on an embassy, a chattel of
great price, yet not that even did the old man grudge from his halls,
for he was exceeding fain at heart to ransom his dear son. Then he
drave out all the Trojans from the colonnade, chiding them with words
of rebuke: “Begone, ye that dishonour and do me shame! Have ye no
mourning of your own at home that ye come to vex me here? Think ye it a
small thing that Zeus Kronos’ son hath given me this sorrow, to lose
him that was the best man of my sons? Nay, but ye too shall feel it,
for easier far shall ye be to the Achaians to slay now he is dead. But
for me, ere I behold with mine eyes the city sacked and wasted, let me
go down into the house of Hades.”

He said, and with his staff chased forth the men, and they went forth
before the old man in his haste. Then he called unto his sons, chiding
Helenos and Paris and noble Agathon and Pammon and Antiphonos, and
Polites of the loud war-cry, and Deiphobos and Hippothoos and proud
Dios; nine were they whom the old man called and bade unto him: “Haste
ye, ill sons, my shame; would that ye all in Hector’s stead had been
slain at the swift ships! Woe is me all unblest, since I begat sons the
best men in wide Troy-land, but none of them is left for me to claim,
neither godlike Mestor, nor Troilos with his chariot of war, nor Hector
who was a god among men, neither seemed he as the son of a mortal man
but of a god:—all these hath Ares slain, and here are my shames all
left to me, false-tongued, light-heeled, the heroes of dance,
plunderers of your own people’s sheep and kids. Will ye not make me
ready a wain with all speed, and lay all these thereon, that we get us
forward on our way?”

Thus spake he, and they fearing their father’s voice brought forth the
smooth-running mule chariot, fair and new, and bound the body thereof
on the frame; and from its peg they took down the mule yoke, a boxwood
yoke with knob well fitted with guiding-rings; and they brought forth
the yoke-band of nine cubits with the yoke. The yoke they set firmly on
the polished pole on the rest at the end thereof, and slipped the ring
over the upright pin, which with three turns of the band they lashed to
the knob, and then belayed it close round the pole and turned the
tongue thereunder. Then they brought from the chamber and heaped on the
polished wain the countless ransom of Hector’s head, and yoked
strong-hooved harness mules, which on a time the Mysians gave to Priam,
a splendid gift. But to Priam’s car they yoked the horses that the old
man kept for his use and reared at the polished crib.

Thus in the high palace were Priam and the herald letting yoke their
cars, with wise thoughts at their hearts, when nigh came Hekabe sore at
heart, with honey-sweet wine in her right hand in a golden cup that
they might make libation ere they went. And she stood before the horses
and spake a word to Priam by name: “Lo now make libation to father Zeus
and pray that thou mayest come back home from among the enemy, since
thy heart speedeth thee forth to the ships, though fain were I thou
wentest not. And next pray to Kronion of the Storm-cloud, the gods of
Ida, that beholdeth all Troy-land beneath, and ask of him a bird of
omen, even the swift messenger that is dearest of all birds to him and
of mightiest strength, to appear upon thy right, that seeing the sign
with thine own eyes thou mayest go in trust thereto unto the ships of
the fleet-horsed Danaans. But if far-seeing Zeus shall not grant unto
thee his messenger, I at least shall not bid thee on to go among the
ships of the Achaians how fain soever thou mayest be.”

Then answered and spake unto her godlike Priam: “Lady, I will not
disregard this hest of thine, for good it is to lift up hands to Zeus,
if haply he will have pity.”

Thus spake the old man, and bade a house-dame that served him pour pure
water on his hands; and she came near to serve him with water in a ewer
to wash withal. And when he had washed his hands he took a goblet from
his wife: then he stood in the midst of the court and prayed and poured
forth wine as he looked up to heaven, and spake a word aloud: “Father
Zeus that bearest sway from Ida, most glorious and most great, grant
that I find welcome and pity under Achilles’ roof, and send a bird of
omen, even the swift messenger that is dearest of all birds to thee and
of mightiest strength, to appear upon the right, that seeing this sign
with mine eyes I may go trusting therein unto the ships of the
fleet-horsed Danaans.”

Thus spake he praying, and Zeus of wise counsels hearkened unto him,
and straightway sent forth an eagle, surest omen of winged birds, the
dusky hunter called of men the Black Eagle. Wide as the door, well
locking, fitted close, of some rich mal’s high-roofed hall, so wide
were his wings either way; and he appeared to them speeding on the
right hand above the city. And when they saw the eagle they rejoiced
and all their hearts were glad within their breasts.

Then the old man made haste to go up into his car, and drave forth from
the doorway and the echoing portico. In front the mules drew the
four-wheeled wain, and wise Idaios drave them; behind came the horses
which the old man urged with the lash at speed along the city: and his
friends all followed lamenting loud as though he were faring to his
death. And when they were come down from the city and were now on the
plain, then went back again to Ilios his sons and marriage kin. But the
two coming forth upon the plain were not unbeheld of far-seeing Zeus.
But he looked upon the old man and had compassion on him, and
straightway spake unto Hermes his dear son: “Hermes, since unto thee
especially is it dear to companion men, and thou hearest whomsoever
thou wilt, go forth and so guide Priam to the hollow ships of the
Achaians that no man behold or be aware of him, among all the Danaans’
host, until he come to the son of Peleus.”

Thus spake he, and the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, was not
disobedient unto his word. Straightway beneath his feet he bound on his
fair sandals, golden, divine, that bare him over wet sea and over the
boundless land with the breathings of the wind. And he took up his wand
wherewith he entranceth the eyes of such men as he will, and others he
likewise waketh out of sleep: this did the strong slayer of Argus take
in his hand, and flew. And quickly came he to Troy-land and the
Hellespont, and went on his way in semblance as a young man that is a
prince, with the new down on his chin, as when the youth of men is the
comeliest.

Now the others, when they had driven beyond the great barrow of Ilios,
halted the mules and horses at the river to drink; for darkness was
come down over the earth. Then the herald beheld Hermes from hard by,
and marked him, and spake and said to Priam: “Consider, son of
Dardanos; this is matter of prudent thought. I see a man, methinks we
shall full soon be rent in pieces. Come, let us flee in our chariot, or
else at least touch his knees and entreat him that he have mercy on
us.”

Thus spake he, and the old man was confounded, and he was dismayed
exceedingly, and the hair on his pliant limbs stood up, and he stood
still amazed. But the Helper came nigh of himself and took the old
mal’s hand, and spake and questioned him: “Whither, father, dost thou
thus guide these horses and mules through the divine night, when other
mortals are asleep? Hadst thou no fear of the fierce-breathing
Achaians, thy bitter foes that are hard anigh thee? If one of them
should espy thee carrying such treasures through the swift black night,
what then would be thy thought? Neither art thou young thyself, and thy
companion here is old, that ye should make defence against a man that
should assail thee first. But I will no wise harm thee, yea I will keep
any other from thy hurt: for the similitude of my dear father I see in
thee.”

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam: “Even so, kind
son, are all these things as thou sayest. Nevertheless hath some god
stretched forth his hand even over me in that he hath sent a wayfarer
such as thou to meet me, a bearer of good luck, by the nobleness of thy
form and semblance; and thou art wise of heart and of blessed parents
art thou sprung.”

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: “All this,
old sire, hast thou verily spoken aright. But come say this and tell me
truly whether thou art taking forth a great and goodly treasure unto
alien men, where it may abide for thee in safety, or whether by this ye
are all forsaking holy Ilios in fear; so far the best man among you
hath perished, even thy son; for of battle with the Achaians abated he
never a jot.”

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam, “Who art thou,
noble sir, and of whom art born? For meetly hast thou spoken of the
fate of my hapless son.”

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: “Thou art
proving me, old sire, in asking me of noble Hector. Him have I full oft
seen with mine eyes in glorious battle, and when at the ships he was
slaying the Argives he drave thither, piercing them with the keen
bronze, and we stood still and marvelled thereat, for Achilles suffered
us not to fight, being wroth against Atreus’ son. His squire am I, and
came in the same well-wrought ship. From the Myrmidons I come, and my
father is Polyktor. Wealthy is he, and an old man even as thou, and six
other sons hath he, and I am his seventh. With the others I cast lots,
and it fell to me to fare hither with the host. And now am I come from
the ships to the plain, for at day-break the glancing-eyed Achaians
will set the battle in array around the town. For it chafeth them to be
sitting here, nor can the Achaian lords hold in their fury for the
fray.”

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: “If verily thou
art a squire of Achilles Peleus’ son, come tell me all the truth,
whether still my son is by the ships, or whether ere now Achilles hath
riven him limb from limb and cast him to the dogs.”

Then to him again spake the Messenger the slayer of Argus: “Old sire,
not yet have dogs or birds devoured him, but there lieth he still by
Achilles’ ship, even as he fell, among the huts, and the twelfth morn
now hath risen upon him, nor doth his flesh corrupt at all, neither
worms consume it, such as devour men slain in war. Truly Achilles
draggeth him recklessly around the barrow of his dear comrade so oft as
divine day dawneth, yet marreth he him not; thou wouldst marvel if thou
couldst go see thyself how dewy fresh he lieth, and is washed clean of
blood, nor anywhere defiled; and all his wounds wherewith he was
stricken are closed; howbeit many of thy son, though he be but a dead
corpse, for they held him dear at heart.”

Thus spake he, and the old man rejoiced, and answered him, saying: “My
son, it is verily a good thing to give due offerings withal to the
Immortals, for never did my child—if that child indeed I had—forget in
our halls the gods who inhabit Olympus. Therefore have they remembered
this for him, albeit his portion is death. But come now take from me
this goodly goblet, and guard me myself and guide me, under Heaven,
that I may come unto the hut of Peleus’ son.”

Then spake unto him again the Messenger the slayer of Argus: “Thou art
proving me, old sire, who am younger than thou, but thou wilt not
prevail upon me, in that thou biddest me take gifts from thee without
Achilles’ privity. I were afraid and shamed at heart to defraud him,
lest some evil come to pass on me hereafter. But as thy guide I would
go even unto famous Argos, accompanying thee courteously in swift ship
or on foot. Not from scorn of thy guide would any assail thee then.”

Thus spake the Helper, and leaping on the chariot behind the horses he
swiftly took lash and reins into his hand, and breathed brave spirit
into horses and mules. But when they were come to the towers and trench
of the ships, there were the sentinels just busying them about their
supper. Then the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, shed sleep upon them
all, and straightway opened the gates and thrust back the bars, and
brought within Priam and the splendid gifts upon his wain. And they
came to the lofty hut of the son of Peleus, which the Myrmidons made
for their king and hewed therefor timber of the pine, and thatched it
with downy thatching-rush that they mowed in the meadows, and around it
made for him their lord a great court with close-set palisades; and the
door was barred by a single bolt of pine that three Achaians wont to
drive home, and three drew back that mighty bar—three of the rest, but
Achilles by himself would drive it home. Then opened the Helper Hermes
the door for the old man, and brought in the splendid gifts for Peleus’
fleet-footed son, and descended from the chariot to the earth and spake
aloud: “Old sire, I that have come to thee am an immortal god, even
Hermes, for my father sent me to companion thee on thy way. But now
will I depart from thee nor come within Achilles’ sight; it were cause
of wrath that an immortal god should thus show favour openly unto
mortals. But thou go in and clasp the knees of Peleus’ son and entreat
him for his father’s sake and his mother’s of the lovely hair and for
his child’s sake that thou mayest move his soul.”

Thus Hermes spake, and departed unto high Olympus. But Priam leapt from
the car to the earth, and left Idaios in his place; he stayed to mind
the horses and mules; but the old man made straight for the house where
Achilles dear to Zeus was wont to sit. And therein he found the man
himself, and his comrades sate apart: two only, the hero Automedon and
Alkimos, of the stock of Ares, were busy in attendance; and he was
lately ceased from meat, even from eating and drinking: and still the
table stood beside him. But they were unaware of great Priam as he came
in, and so stood he anigh and clasped in his hands the knees of
Achilles, and kissed his hands, terrible, man-slaying, that slew many
of Priam’s sons. And as when a grievous curse cometh upon a man who in
his own country hath slain another and escapeth to a land of strangers,
to the house of some rich man, and wonder possesseth them that look on
him—so Achilles wondered when he saw godlike Priam, and the rest
wondered likewise, and looked upon one another. Then Priam spake and
entreated him, saying: “Bethink thee, O Achilles like to gods, of thy
father that is of like years with me, on the grievous pathway of old
age. Him haply are the dwellers round about entreating evilly, nor is
there any to ward from him ruin and bane. Nevertheless while he heareth
of thee as yet alive he rejoiceth in his heart, and hopeth withal day
after day that he shall see his dear son returning from Troy-land. But
I, I am utterly unblest, since I begat sons the best men in wide
Troy-land, but declare unto thee that none of them is left. Fifty I
had, when the sons of the Achaians came; nineteen were born to me of
one mother, and concubines bare the rest within my halls. Now of the
more part had impetuous Ares unstrung the knees, and he who was yet
left and guarded city and men, him slewest thou but now as he fought
for his country, even Hector. For his sake come I unto the ships of the
Achaians that I may win him back from thee, and I bring with me untold
ransom. Yea, fear thou the gods, Achilles, and have compassion on me,
even me, bethinking thee of thy father. Lo, I am yet more piteous than
he, and have braved what none other man on earth hath braved before, to
stretch forth my hand toward the face of the slayer of my sons.”

Thus spake he, and stirred within Achilles desire to make lament for
his father. And he touched the old mal’s hand and gently moved him
back. And as they both bethought them of their dead, so Priam for
man-slaying Hector wept sore as he was fallen before Achilles’ feet,
and Achilles wept for his own father, and now again for Patroklos, and
their moan went up throughout the house. But when noble Achilles had
satisfied him with lament, and the desire thereof departed from his
heart and limbs, straightway he sprang from his seat and raised the old
man by his hand, pitying his hoary head and hoary beard, and spake unto
him winged words and said: “Ah hapless! many ill things verily thou
hast endured in thy heart. How durst thou come alone to the ships of
the Achaians and to meet the eyes of the man who hath slain full many
of the brave sons? of iron verily is thy heart. But come then set thee
on a seat, and we will let our sorrows lie quiet in our hearts for all
our pain, for no avail cometh of chill lament. This is the lot the gods
have spun for miserable men, that they should live in pain; yet
themselves are sorrowless. For two urns stand upon the floor of Zeus
filled with his evil gifts, and one with blessings. To whomsoever Zeus
whose joy is in the lightning dealeth a mingled lot, that man chanceth
now upon ill and now again on good, but to whom he giveth but of the
bad kind him he bringeth to scorn, and evil famine chaseth him over the
goodly earth, and he is a wanderer honoured of neither gods nor men.
Even thus to Peleus gave the gods splendid gifts from his birth, for he
excelled all men in good fortune and wealth, and was king of the
Myrmidons, and mortal though he was the gods gave him a goddess to be
his bride. Yet even on him God brought evil, seeing that there arose to
him no offspring of princely sons in his halls, save that he begat one
son to an untimely death. Neither may I tend him as he groweth old,
since very far from my country I am dwelling in Troy-land, to vex thee
and thy children. And of thee, old sire, we have heard how of old time
thou wert happy, even how of all that Lesbos, seat of Makar, boundeth
to the north thereof and Phrygia farther up and the vast Hellespont—of
all these folk, men say, thou wert the richest in wealth and in sons,
but after that the Powers of Heaven brought this bane on thee, ever are
battles and man-slayings around thy city. Keep courage, and lament not
unabatingly in thy heart. For nothing wilt thou avail by grieving for
thy son, neither shalt thou bring him back to life or ever some new
evil come upon thee.”

Then made answer unto him the old man, godlike Priam: “Bid me not to a
seat, O fosterling of Zeus, so long as Hector lieth uncared for at the
huts, but straightway give him back that I may behold him with mine
eyes; and accept thou the great ransom that we bring. So mayest thou
have pleasure thereof, and come unto thy native land, since thou hast
spared me from the first.”

Then fleet-footed Achilles looked sternly upon him and said: “No longer
chafe me, old sire; of myself am I minded to give Hector back to thee,
for there came to me a messenger from Zeus, even my mother who bare me,
daughter of the Ancient One of the Sea. And I know, O Priam, in my
mind, nor am unaware that some god it is that hath guided thee to the
swift ships of the Achaians. For no mortal man, even though in prime of
youth, would dare to come among the host, for neither could he escape
the watch, nor easily thrust back the bolt of our doors. Therefore now
stir my heart no more amid my troubles, lest I leave not even thee in
peace, old sire, within my hut, albeit thou art my suppliant, and lest
I transgress the commandment of Zeus.”

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and obeyed his word. And the son
of Peleus leapt like a lion through the door of the house, not alone,
for with him went two squires, the hero Automedon and Alkimos, they
whom above all his comrades Achilles honoured, save only Patroklos that
was dead. They then loosed from under the yoke the horses and mules,
and led in the old mal’s crier-herald and set him on a chair, and from
the wain of goodly felloes they took the countless ransom set on
Hector’s head. But they left two robes and a well-spun doublet, that
Achilles might wrap the dead therein when he gave him to be carried
home. And he called forth handmaids and bade them wash and anoint him
when they had borne him apart, so that Priam should not look upon his
son, lest he should not refrain the wrath at his sorrowing heart when
he should look upon his son, and lest Achilles’ heart be vexed thereat
and he slay him and transgress the commandment of Zeus. So when the
handmaids had washed the body and anointed it with oil, and had thrown
over it a fair robe and a doublet, then Achilles himself lifted it and
laid it on a bier, and his comrades with him lifted it on to the
polished waggon. Then he groaned aloud and called on his dear comrade
by his name: “Patroklos, be not vexed with me if thou hear even in the
house of Hades that I have given back noble Hector unto his dear
father, for not unworthy is the ransom he hath given me, whereof I will
deal to thee again thy rightful share.”

Thus spake noble Achilles, and went back into the hut, and sate him
down on the cunningly-wrought couch whence he had arisen by the
opposite wall, and spake a word to Priam: “Thy son, old sire, is given
back as thou wouldest and lieth on a bier, and with the break of day
thou shalt see him thyself as thou carriest him. But now bethink we us
of supper. For even fair-haired Niobe bethought her of meat, she whose
twelve children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty
sons. The sons Apollo, in his anger against Niobe, slew with arrows
from his silver bow, and the daughters archer Artemis, for that Niobe
matched herself against fair-cheeked Leto, saying that the goddess bare
but twain but herself many children: so they though they were but twain
destroyed the other all. Nine days they lay in their blood, nor was
there any to bury them, for Kronion turned the folk to stones. Yet on
the tenth day the gods of heaven buried them, and she then bethought
her of meat, when she was wearied out with weeping tears. And somewhere
now among the cliffs, on the lonely mountains, even on Sipylos, where
they say are the couching-places of nymphs that dance around Acheloos,
there she, albeit a stone, broodeth still over her troubles from the
gods. But come let us too, noble father, take thought of meat, and
afterward thou shalt mourn over thy dear son as thou carriest him to
Ilios; and many tears shall be his due.”

Thus spake fleet Achilles, and sprang up, and slew a pure white sheep,
and his comrades skinned and made it ready in seemly fashion, and
divided it cunningly and pierced it with spits, and roasted it
carefully and drew all off. And Automedon took bread and served it on a
table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt out the flesh. And they
stretched forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them.
But when they had put off the desire of meat and drink, then Priam son
of Dardanos marvelled at Achilles to see how great he was and how
goodly, for he was like a god to look upon. And Achilles marvelled at
Priam son of Dardanos, beholding his noble aspect and hearkening to his
words. But when they had gazed their fill upon one another, then first
spake the old man, godlike Priam, to Achilles: “Now presently give me
whereon to lie, fosterling of Zeus, that of sweet sleep also we may now
take our fill at rest: for never yet have mine eyes closed beneath
their lids since at thy hands my son lost his life, but I continually
mourn and brood over countless griefs, grovelling in the
courtyard-close amid the mire. Now at last have I tasted bread and
poured bright wine down my throat, but till now I had tasted naught.”

He said, and Achilles bade his comrades and handmaids to set a bedstead
beneath the portico, and to cast thereon fair shining rugs and spread
coverlets above and thereon to lay thick mantles to be a clothing over
all. And the maids went forth from the inner hail with torches in their
hands, and quickly spread two beds in haste. Then with bitter meaning
[in his reference to Agamemnon] said fleet-footed Achilles unto Priam:
“Lie thou without, dear sire, lest there come hither one of the
counsellors of the Achaians, such as ever take counsel with me by my
side, as custom is. If any of such should behold thee through the swift
black night, forthwith he might haply tell it to Agamemnon shepherd of
the host, and thus would there be delay in giving back the dead. But
come say this to me and tell it true, how many days’ space thou art
fain to make funeral for noble Hector, so that for so long I may myself
abide and may keep back the host.”

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: “If thou art
verily willing that I accomplish noble Hector’s funeral, by doing as
thou sayest, O Achilles, thou wilt do me grace. For thou knowest how we
are pent within the city, and wood from the mountain is far to fetch,
and the Trojans are much in fear. Nine days will we make moan for him
in our halls, and on the tenth we will hold funeral and the folk shall
feast, and on the eleventh we will make, a barrow over him, and on the
twelfth we will do battle if need be.”

Then again spake the fleet noble Achilles unto him, saying: “All this,
O ancient Priam, shall be as thou biddest; for I will hold back the
battle even so long a time as thou tellest me.”

Thus speaking he clasped the old mal’s right hand at the wrist, lest he
should be anywise afraid at heart. So they in the forepart of the house
laid them down, Priam and the herald, with wise thoughts at their
hearts, but Achilles slept in a recess of the firm-wrought hut, and
beside him lay fair-cheeked Briseis.

Now all other gods and warriors lords of chariots slumbered all night,
by soft sleep overcome. But not on the Helper Hermes did sleep take
hold as he sought within his heart how he should guide forth king Priam
from the ships unespied of the trusty sentinels. And he stood above his
head and spake a word to him: “Old sire, no thought then hast thou of
any evil, seeing thou yet sleepest among men that are thine enemies,
for that Achilles spared thee. Truly now hast thou won back thy dear
son, and at great price. But for thy life will thy sons thou hast left
behind be offering threefold ransom, if but Agamemnon Atreus’ son be
aware of thee, and aware be all the Achaians.”

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and roused the herald. And
Hermes yoked the horses and mules for them, and himself drave them
lightly through the camp, and none was aware of them.

But when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, [even eddying
Xanthos, begotten of immortal Zeus,] then Hermes departed up to high
Olympus, and Morning of the saffron robe spread over all the earth. And
they with wail and moan drave the horses to the city, and the mules
drew the dead. Nor marked them any man or fair-girdled woman until
Kassandra, peer of golden Aphrodite, having gone up upon Pergamos, was
aware of her dear father as he stood in the car, and the herald that
was crier to the town. Then beheld she him that lay upon the bier
behind the mules, and thereat she wailed and cried aloud throughout all
the town: “O men and women of Troy, come ye hither and look upon
Hector, if ever while he was alive ye rejoiced when he came back from
battle, since great joy was he to the city and all the folk.”

Thus spake she, nor was man or woman left within the city, for upon all
came unendurable grief. And near the gates they met Priam bringing home
the dead. First bewailed him his dear wife and lady mother, as they
cast them on the fair-wheeled wain and touched his head; and around
them stood the throng and wept. So all day long unto the setting of the
sun they had lamented Hector in tears without the gate, had not the old
man spoken from the car among the folk: “Give me place for the mules to
pass through; hereafter ye shall have your fill of wailing, when I have
brought him unto his home.”

Thus spake he, and they parted asunder and gave place to the wain. And
the others when they had brought him to the famous house, laid him on a
fretted bed, and set beside him minstrel leaders of the dirge, who
wailed a mournful lay, while the women made moan with them. And among
the women white-armed Andromache led the lamentation, while in her
hands she held the head of Hector slayer of men: “Husband, thou art
gone young from life, and leavest me a widow in thy halls. And the
child is yet but a little one, child of ill-fated parents, thee and me;
nor methinks shall he grow up to manhood, for ere then shall this city
be utterly destroyed. For thou art verily perished who didst watch over
it, who guardedst it and keptest safe its noble wives and infant little
ones. These soon shall be voyaging in the hollow ships, yea and I too
with them, and thou, my child, shalt either go with me unto a place
where thou shalt toil at unseemly tasks, labouring before the face of
some harsh lord, or else some Achaian will take thee by the arm and
hurl thee from the battlement, a grievous death, for that he is wroth
because Hector slew his brother or father or son, since full many of
the Achaians in Hector’s hands have bitten the firm earth. For no light
hand had thy father in the grievous fray. Therefore the folk lament him
throughout the city, and woe unspeakable and mourning hast thou left to
thy parents, Hector, but with me chiefliest shall grievous pain abide.
For neither didst thou stretch thy hands to me from a bed in thy death,
neither didst speak to me some memorable word that I might have thought
on evermore as my tears fall night and day.”

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan. And among them
Hekabe again led the loud lament: “Hector, of all my children far
dearest to my heart, verily while thou wert alive dear wert thou to the
gods, and even in thy doom of death have they had care for thee. For
other sons of mine whom he took captive would fleet Achilles sell
beyond the unvintaged sea unto Samos and Imbros and smoking Lemnos, but
when with keen-edged bronze he had bereft thee of thy life he was fain
to drag thee oft around the tomb of his comrade, even Patroklos whom
thou slewest, yet might he not raise him up thereby. But now all dewy
and fresh thou liest in our halls, like one on whom Apollo, lord of the
silver bow, hath descended and slain him with his gentle darts.”

Thus spake she wailing, and stirred unending moan. Then thirdly Helen
led their sore lament: “Hector, of all my brethren of Troy far dearest
to my heart! Truly my lord is godlike Alexandros who brought me to
Troy-land—would I had died ere then. For this is now the twentieth year
since I went thence and am gone from my own native land, but never yet
heard I evil or despiteful word from thee; nay, if any other haply
upbraided me in the palace-halls, whether brother or sister of thine or
brother’s fair-robed wife, or thy mother—but thy father is ever kind to
me as he were my own—then wouldst thou soothe such with words and
refrain them, by the gentleness of thy spirit and by thy gentle words.
Therefore bewail I thee with pain at heart, and my hapless self with
thee, for no more is any left in wide Troy-land to be my friend and
kind to me, but all men shudder at me.”

Thus spake she wailing, and therewith the great multitude of the people
groaned. But the old man Priam spake a word among the folk: “Bring
wood, men of Troy, unto the city, and be not anywise afraid at heart of
a crafty ambush of the Achaians; for this message Achilles gave me when
he sent me from the black ships, that they should do us no hurt until
the twelfth morn arise.”

Thus spake he, and they yoked oxen and mules to wains, and quickly then
they flocked before the city. So nine days they gathered great store of
wood. But when the tenth morn rose with light for men, then bare they
forth brave Hector, weeping tears, and on a lofty pyre they laid the
dead man, and thereon cast fire.

But when the daughter of Dawn, rosy-fingered Morning, shone forth, then
gathered the folk around glorious Hector’s pyre. First quenched they
with bright wine all the burning, so far as the fire’s strength went,
and then his brethren and comrades gathered his white bones lamenting,
and big tears flowed down their cheeks. And the bones they took and
laid in a golden urn, shrouding them in soft purple robes, and
straightway laid the urn in a hollow grave and piled thereon great
close-set stones, and heaped with speed a barrow, while watchers were
set everywhere around, lest the well-greaved Achaians should make onset
before the time. And when they had heaped the barrow they went back,
and gathered them together and feasted right well in noble feast at the
palace of Priam, Zeus-fostered king.

Thus held they funeral for Hector tamer of horses.


